Leibniz, Corporeal Substances, and Biology
==========================================

The breadth and precision of the work of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz is
astonishing. Writing between the mid-1650s and early 1700s, Leibniz’s
vast contributions to mathematics and philosophy are overwhelming. As an
early modern, Lebniz wrote just on the cusp of the bulk of the
Scientific Revolution. There are accepted scientific discoveries taught
to every child of the 21st Century that Leibniz never had access to. As
a consequence of this, Leibniz’s theory could not have been conceived
with many of what are now prominent scientific theories in mind. It is
impossible to determine how Leibniz would have accommodated or changed
his system had he known of the tremendous advances humanity has made
since his time, but it perfectly possible to see how his theory stands
against new knowledge. A quality of a good theory is being able to
predict and account for new information. Leibniz’s conception of
corporeal substances is of particular interest to this endeavor, as much
has been discovered since Darwin about the nature of humankind and their
animal, plant, and bacterial co-inhabitants. Leibniz developed a system
to explain what it meant to be alive, to be animated, and why humankind
appear to be different from other life 100 years before the fundamental
theory of biology, evolution by natural select, had been seriously
proposed. It was many hundred more before it was widely accepted and
explored by the scientific community and the public. There are facts
about the natural world which integrate nicely into Leibniz’s thought,
but there are also facts and theories which stand in direct conflict
with Leibniz’s view. Leibniz is renowned for his lifelong attempts at
the irenicism of Catholicism and Protestantism, and in similar spirit,
this paper will set out to point out and reconcile the differences in a
modern understanding of science and biology with Leibniz’s conception of
corporeal substance.

In order to explore Leibniz on corporeal substance, one must begin with
an understanding of his account of substance. This begins with Leibniz’s
Concept Containment Theory of Truth, that is, that a true proposition is
a predicate which contains within it the concept of the subject. From
this, Leibniz concludes that something is a substance if and only if its
concepts contains the basis and reason for everything that can be truly
said of that thing. This means that it contains all predicates which
could possibly be said of that thing in the past, present, and future.
This leads Leibniz to the following conclusions about substances:

1.  No two substances are exactly alike (Principle of the Identity of
    the Indiscernables);

2.  Every substance begins only by creation and cease to exist only by
    annihilation;

3.  No substance can be divided into 2 substances or be formed by
    combining 2 substances;

4.  Every substance is a mirror of the universe and of God (Mirroring
    Thesis); and

5.  Every substance bears in some way the character of god, wisdom, and
    power

It is from this platform that one can understand Leibniz’s criticism of
Cartesian corporeal substance. Leibniz holds that Cartesian bodies,
Descartes’ account of corporeal substance, are unreal. Because every
Cartesian body (C-body) is composed of C-bodies, Leibniz holds, a C-body
is an aggregate. An aggregate can only be real if it’s components are
real, but a C-body contains nothing but aggregates. Therefore, C-bodies
are unreal. This means bodies are examples of vagueness for Leibniz,
just like heaps of stones.

To solve this, Leibniz uses souls. The soul is the substance formed when
when a substantial form and a body have true unity (as opposed to the
accidental unity of rainbow and bodies). Leibniz points out that souls
meet the definition for substances, as they are immaterial, not composed
of parts, cannot be destroyed, cannot be corrupted, they contain all
past and future states, and all states of the universe. He states that
human beings definitely have substantial forms, but he is unsure about
other animals. This is important for Leibniz because God needs a
timeless way to discern and plan the course of the entire universe from
every given substance, and bodies are vague and not timeless.

Armed with a crash course in the metaphysical status of bodies in
Leibniz, the reader is prepared to analyze some facts discovered some
facts about biology since Leibniz’s death. There is at least one
discovery which Leibniz would likely rejoice in!

One-hundred trillion. That’s the number of bacteria present in every
human in what is known as the “human micro biome.” The Stanford
microbiologist Dr. David Relman says that humans are “like coral” in
that they are an “an assemblage of life-forms living together.” There
are ten times more bacterial cells in humans than human cells (the
latter are much bigger). Every human has one to two and half *kilograms*
of bacterial mass at any given time. Dr. Relman adds that it’s
“humbling” (@nyt). This is a perfect example of how C-bodies are unreal
in the metaphysical sense, and how they may be very like rainbows and
heaps of rocks. It would be consistent with Leibniz’s point to ask a
question like, is a human without a micro biome still human? The answer
is, of course, intuitively quite obvious, but clearly become
increasingly problematic. This supports Leibniz because it makes
physical bodies vague aggregates, which require some metaphysical
grounding.

But using this as evidence for Leibniz’s claims is problematic.
Leibniz’s claim is that C-bodies are infinitely divisible, yet there is
a fairly rigid definition of what is “alive” in biology. Cells are
considered to be the “atom” in biology, where those sub-cellular parts
that make a cell are not considered to be a living things on their own.
A defender of Leibniz would respond that cells are, in fact, easily
divisible. Cells are composed of 20 amino acids, five nucleotide bases,
a few sugars, and some lipids (@life); and that the parts not being
alive is irrelevant, cells are still infinitely divisible. This type of
argument is forever at the risk of committing “god of the gaps”-type
argument from ignorance fallacy, where Leibniz’s opponent respond that
these components actually have some other finite indivisibility, be it
atoms, sub-atomic particles, quantum bosons, photons ... This argument,
however, is one which Leibniz’s metaphysical theory can be said to have
predicted. Leibniz is right, and consistent with the evidence, bodies
are vague. But Leibniz may be mistaken that bodies are *infinitely*
divisible.

There is a technique in horticulture known as “grafting,” and it
involves taking vascular tissue from one plant and inserting it into
another plant so that they may form one plant. It is used when one plant
has a desirable roots and trunk, and another plant with desirable stem,
leaves, flowers, or fruits. It’s useful because a farmer can, for
instance, take advantage of the fast growing qualities of one plant and
the pretty flowers or tasty fruit of another. There are many other uses,
ranging from repair to improving sturdiness to as a mere curiosity
attraction (@grafting).

This is relevant to Leibniz because he holds that no substance can be
divided into two or combined to form one. Leibniz also holds that any
given substance can only come into being by creation. Perhaps for plants
this is easily written off as, well, plants must not have substantial
forms. It is intuitive, though not clear, that plants do not warrant
souls. This would mean that grafting is not the combining or dividing of
substances, and becomes unproblematic.

What happens as the argument moves closer to humankind, who Leibniz
explicitly says have substantial forms, souls, and corporeal substance.
Sponges are animals which do not have nervous, digestive, or circulatory
systems, instead they rely on water to distribute nutrients and remove
waste. Unlike all plants, sponges share the same kingdom as humankind:
Animalia. And they have this curious way of reproducing. They can “bud”,
an asexual means of reproducing where fragments of the animal fall off
by means of being hit by a wave or akin, and those fragments go on to
form an entirely distinct sponge (@sponges). This is a problem for
Leibniz because sponges are animals which share many characteristics
with humans, and if they are granted souls or substance, then it would
be the case that a substance could be formed from the division of
another.

But perhaps even though sponges are animals, they are still too simple
to warrant souls. A defender of Leibniz may say that while sponges are
classified zoologically as being similar to humans, there are relevant,
explicit differences in complexity that distinguish sponges from
humanity. From this, there are rational bases for believe that humankind
have substantial forms while sponges do not. What is worrying about this
for Leibniz is that it’s possible to move all the way up the tree of
life and find instances of what appears to be substances being created
by division of existing substances. Leibniz’s definition of substance
has to answer to a growing list of asexual reproduction in and out of
the animal kingdom, e.g. the splitting of worms, Timema insects using
solely asexual reproduction for (evidently) millions of years,
parthenogenesis in hammerhead sharks, the list grows.

But even if the critics of Leibniz grant that human beings are
absolutely unique in all of life on Earth in being complex enough to
warrant having substantial form, there are still problems. The primary
means of explaining the complexity of life on Earth is the fundamental
theory of biology, which is change over time by means of natural
selection. This process implies two things: (1) There must have been
some point of creation, which formed the substance on which change over
time operated on, and (2) That there was some point in natural history
in which the life that was to be humans did not have the prerequisite
complexity to warrant substantial form. Leibniz theory of souls works if
the story described in Genesis is assumed. Working under the premise of
the modern understanding of science, a Leibnizian needs to be able to
describe how a soul could be “gained” or “injected” into a sufficiently
complex life form, after a long period of development.

Everything in the Universe contains marks and traces of everything else
in the Universe, Leibniz holds. And on the subject of life on Earth,
modern science corroborates his claim, as all creatures share the same
language of life, DNA. Furthermore, a modern understanding of science
would confirm Leibniz’s claims about the vagueness of bodies, in that it
is unclear at what point one has a body and when one does not have a
body. What needs explaining, however, is how this shared heritage can be
while humankind remain unique in having substantial form. It is a
testament to Leibniz’s genius that hundreds of years of rapid
advancement of science and understanding of the natural world have not
vanquished his theory. Instead, his system raises perplexing questions
which inspire further research in both philosophy and natural science.
