# Assertion and its Problems <small>by Paul Jones</small>

In a complex synthesis of epistemology, linguistics, and normativity,
the study of assertion has emerged as both an exciting and troubling
field of tremendous depth. A product of the many fields which intersect
to form the study of assertion is that there is a high barrier for entry
for appreciating the work done. There is a high degree of prerequisite
knowledge required to critically analyze an account of assertion. This
paper will seek to accurately summarize and integrate four works to give
a uninitiated reader a foundation for further exploring the literature
on the subject. By demonstrating how the machinery of the study of
assertion operates and defining the vocabulary used, this introductory
paper will leave the reader capable of analyzing accounts of assertion.
The works of John MacFarlane, G.E. Moore, Max Black, and Paul Grice
covered here will serve as comprehensive and introductory review of
assertion, By demonstrating the dialogue that naturally follows from
their conclusions, the apparatus of assertion will become clear.
MacFarlane’s “What is Assertion” offers a robust and accessible review
of the major accounts of assertion. Moore’s renowned “Moore’s Paradox”
presents a problem whose solution has become required by any account of
assertion. Black’s third chapter of *Problems and Analysis* entitled
“Saying and Disbelieving” does exactly this, by directly responding to
Moore with a thorough description of why the paradox is an impermissible
assertive action. Grice’s “Logic and Conversation” describes the process
of implicature in exquisite detail, and explicitly defines a rule which
Black only refers to. Through these papers, the reader will discover the
common conversation they all belong to, and emerge equipped for further
dialogue. Finally, this work will use John William’s “Moorean
Absurdities and the Nature of Assertion” as an example of the
application of the toolkit the reader will develop.

An appropriate paper to open a conversation on knowledge and assertion
with is John MacFarlane’s “What is Assertion?,” as it effectively and
objectively summarizes the work and accounts of many philosophers in
this field. He first shows the reader how assertion is part of the set
of linguistic acts (like promising, yodeling, etc), which is part of the
superset of all acts (like kicking rocks). MacFarlane seeks to answer
how assertion is different from these other acts. He distinguishes
between the force of the statement and the statement’s content by
penning the model for assertion “*V*ing with content *p*.” There are
many questions this raises, MacFarlane says, such as how does one
distinguish between assertion and implication? Can one assert by a
physical action? MacFarlane writes that there are four principle
accounts of how assertion is different from other acts, and how one is
to answer these questions, and they are:

1. To assert is to express an attitude,
2. To assert is to make a move defined by its constitutive rules,
3. To assert is to propose to add information to the conversational
common ground, and 
4. To assert is to undertake a commitment.

While there are uncontroversial and highly intuitive elements about (1),
there are also serious issues. This is an example of an *account of
assertion*, and it evaluated based on how well it describes the act,
resolves problems, and answers objections. In modern pragmatics, (1) is
wielded most prominently by Kent Bach and Robert Harnish. Their
formulation is as follows: *S* asserts that *p* if *S* expresses the
belief that *p*, and the intention that *H* believe that *p*. An example
of a objection to this view, MacFarlane notes, is the account’s
inability to explain how asserters can retract an utterance. This
problem holds that one can not retract the expression of an attitude,
yet intuition and experience holds that asserters can in fact do this.
So there must be something wrong with this machinery for evaluating
assertion. While (1) has uncontroversial elements and some problematic
implications, (2) however, is hotly contested and convincingly argued
for. There has been much work done on it, by Timothy Williamson most
especially, and it will be the principle account of this work. (2)
proposes that when one asserts, one is making a move much like a move in
chess: There are a broad array of possible moves, and the rules define
the valid moves. Without each and every constitutive rule, that
particular game is no longer being played. On this view, the
constitutive and non-constitutive rules of assertion must be discovered
and defined. The most prominent account of the constitutive rule of
assertion is Williamson’s Knowledge Rule (KR). The other three being the
Belief Rule (BR), the Truth Rule (TR), the Reasonable to Believe Rule
(RBR), as follows:

- (KR) Assert that *p* iff one knows that *p*.
- (BR) Assert that *p* iff one believes that *p*.
- (TR) Assert that *p* iff it is true that *p*.
- (RBR) Assert that *p* iff it is reasonable to believe that *p*.

The way that this account of assertion would deal with the objection of
retraction described above by defining a non-constitive norm of
assertion like, “One must: retract a previous assertion *A* when one
performed *A* and (one knows that the content of) *A* was untrue.” In
fact, as MacFarlane acknowledges, if either KR or TR is true, such a
retraction would be required everywhere it is permitted. This is an
example of an (2) successfully answering an objection, while this
particular objection was not satisfyingly solved by (1). If this were
the only criteria used to evaluate these two assertic theories, it would
be reason to believe (2) over (1). The position of those who adopt (3)
is that when two people converse, there are numerous possible worlds,
and with every successful assertion there are a number fewer. Finally,
(4) holds that when one asserts, one is making oneself responsible for
the truth of the assertion, complete with social ramifications. These
last two are not covered by this work, but (2) will be explored at
length.

“It’s raining but I don’t believe that it is raining.” Taking a sharp
turn from MacFarlane’s descriptive work to G.E. Moore’s “Moore’s
Paradox,” this paper now turns to the *problem* stated above. Much of
the philosophy of knowledge and assertion is obliged to respond to
Moore’s work on the problem that is now called “Moore’s Paradox.” It is
a simple paradox, the model is as follows:

- (MP) *p* and I do not believe that *p*.

What is the problem with this? As Moore points out, it is not MP’s
semantic meaning or the impossibility of MP’s conditions being true
simultaneously. Because the words are totally sensical, and both *p* and
“I don’t believe that *p*” can be true simultaneously. Rather, Moore
holds, the problem is actually that there is nothing wrong with (MP)
*when there should be*! According to Moore, the paradox is not a
face-value logical paradox like “This statement is false.” The words are
not in and of themselves absurd to say, but rather, the problem with
(MP) is that it is “absurd to say [the words] in a way in which people
utter sentences.” The struggle, therefore, is to determine the “way in
which people utter sentences” to understand why (MP) is assertively
impermissible. (MP) becomes even more problematic when viewed from other
tenses: “Moore doesn’t believe it is raining, but as a matter of fact it
is.” There is nothing wrong with either the semantics and logic or the
words and the way in which people utter them. According to Moore, this
makes the statement more problematic because, “Why should it be absurd
for me to say about myself a thing which is not absurd for another to
say about me.” Moore explains his paradox with his belief that asserting
something not only implies that we believe it but also that we know it
(most of the time). This would be an example of adopting both the KR and
RBR as norms of assertion, both of which could dismantle MP. In this
way, Moore’s Paradox is used to evaluate views about knowledge and
assertion; a view about how knowledge and assertion work must be capable
of explaining what is contradictory, paradoxical, or wrong about (MP).

While (MP) is an example of a problem, what Max Black offers in his work
“Saying and Disbelieving” is an answer, a solution, to (MP). Black
disputes that there is nothing obviously contradictory in the logic of
(MP). If Black is successful and his argument valid, it would lend
credence to the account of assertion he uses to dismantle (MP). Black
argues that it is a presupposition of an “honest assertion” that there
is a “certain accord” between the words a speaker uses and his
*knowledge*. This would explain the way in which it is “absurd to say
(MP) in a way in which people utter sentences.” This is because both
cannot be true about the world in an honest assertion where it is
presupposed that assertion requires belief, which is an expression of
(RBR). (MP) is not possible because one cannot reasonably believe both
*p* and “I don’t believe that *p*” simultaneously. Furthermore, Black
believes that the term “assertion” is synonymous with “honest
assertion.” Perhaps a way that a person behaves when making an honest
assertion is Grice’s Cooperative Principle, described later in this
paper. This is an example of why Black believes that linguists and
logicians are not answering the right questions or coming to the correct
conclusions, he argues that they concentrate on meaning and not
significance. He provides the example “Close the door, but do not close
the door!” Black attempts to show that linguists and logicians of the
Moorean persuasion would point out no contradiction in meaning of a
statement like that, and he claims they are using meaning as sole test
of coherency. As soon as one uses significance to analyze the sentence,
when one considers the way that language is conventionally used, the
sentence displays the contradiction that intuition reveals. This casts
Moore’s Paradox not as a paradox or contradiction, but rather a misuse.
Black says that Moore’s Paradox is not equivalent to misuses like
“Runcibles are chaffable” (nonsense), or “Every triangle has two parts”
(invalidity), or “A virus is inanimate” (requires qualification).
Instead, he claims, (MP) is “inoperative”, a failure of language,
language without effect. If, as MacFarlane claims, assertion is an act,
Black would say that (MP) is like kicking the air versus kicking a rock
- an act with substance but without effect.

Paul Grice, in his paper “Logic and Conversation” from his book *The
Study in the Way of Words*, explicitly outlines the process of
implicature. This work fits together with Black because it concentrates
on meaning over significance. To demonstrate his point, Grice outlines a
hypothetical conversation between two colleagues:

> “How is C doing in his job?,” asks the first. The second replies,

> “Oh quite well, I think; he likes his colleagues, and he hasn’t been to
prison yet.”

This is the type of conversation where Black may say that logicians and
linguists would point out a problem with the meaning of “he hasn’t been
to prison yet.” This is where Grice comes in: Grice calls this
implicature, and it is when an assertion has a meaning that is beyond
what is signified. The distinction identified by Black is identical to
the Gricean distinction between what is said and what is implicated. For
someone who adopts (1) as an account of assertion, like Bach and
Harnish, this is a problem. Statements like “he hasn’t been to prison
yet” presupposes certain facts, be it that *C* is at a job that tempts
him to do something illegal or similar. If assertion is solely the
expression of an attitude, it requires logical acrobatics to arrive at a
position where one can express something that is not explicit. The
problem for Bach, Harnish, and (1) is that there is an exterior fact (an
attitude) about *C* that was not asserted, but clearly intended.
MacFarlane’s words on the subject would be as follows:

> But it is very difficult to see how one could R-intend the hearer to
> take one’s utterance as a reason to think one believes [*C* hasn’t
> been to prison yet], without also R-intending the hearer to take one’s
> utterance as a reason to think one believes that [*C* is dangerously
> close to doing something illegal].

So there must be some other process to assertion outside of (1). The
adopter of (2) and (KR), on the other hand, would argue that the speaker
is following a non-constitutive norm which can be derived from (KR).

How is it that listeners can derive an ulterior meaning from the
proposition that “*C* has not been to prison yet.”? What process exists
which explains what (1) cannot? A possible and well-received answer to
both these questions is Grice’s explicit formulation of implicature,
which uses his Gricean Maxims, which are as follows:

- (Quantity) Be as informative as is required.
- (Quality) Do not say what you believe to be false or what you don’t have
evidence for.
- (Relation) Be relevant.
- (Manner) Be brief, orderly, and unambiguous.

When subjects exchange assertions, Grice claims, they agree to these
conversational rules under the Cooperative Principle:

- (CP) “Make your contribution such as it is required, at the stage at
which it occurs, by the accepted purpose or direction of the talk
exchange in which you are engaged.”

When a subject *S* flouts a maxim while the hearer still believes *S* is
following (CP), Grice argues, *S* is implying something. In the case of
*C*, by asserting that “*C* has not been to prison yet”, the assertor is
flouting (Quantity) because she does not provide sufficient context for
an outsider to comprehend the assertion, yet she is still assumed to be
participating in the conversation, and therefore there is an
implication. Furthermore, Grice would view (MP) much the same way Black
does, that being as the paradox flouts a Maxim, there must be some
ulterior assertive motive assuming (CP). It is impossible to assert (MP)
without also, by definition, asserting something that “you believe to be
false”, therefore the asserter of (MP) will always break (Quality). This
means that if the participants of a conversation believe the asserter of
(MP) to be following (CP), she must be implicating by asserting (MP),
which is context specific. One could imagine a permutation of (MP) from
a creationist public school-teacher speaking amongst religious peers,
who asserts “Evolution happened, but I don’t believe it.” Grice’s Maxims
are also successful at accounting for openly dishonest assertions where
(1) fails.

John Williams, in his work “Moorean Absurdities and the Nature of
Assertion”, defines what he calls “Moorean sentences” and assertion in
general. The two accounts explaining (MP) described previously are: (1)
Moore’s original explanation of his paradox was such that implies the
lack of belief that \\(\sim\\)*p*, and (2) the Williamsoniam view that (MP)
violates a norm of assertion, namely (KR). Williams, a well established
expert on (MP), offers a more precise definition of what he calls
Moorean sentences and a more explicit distinguishing of what is absurd
about (MP). He defines assertion and Moorean sentences as follows:

- ​(A) Anyone asserts that *p* iff that person expresses a belief that *p*
with the intention of causing relevant epistemic change in the cognition
of an audience.
- (MS) Any proposition is Moorean iff it is consistent and any assertor of
it can be justifiably criticized as irrational, but only on the
assumption that he believes it.

These two definitions are completely consistent with one another and
with the account primarily adopted by this paper, with one exception.
The reader, armed with the machinery described up until this point, will
be able to identify (A) as primarily equivalent to (BR). This is not to
say one cannot accept (A) and also a (KR)-based account of (2), as
belief is a required component of knowledge. Similarly, the reader can
dissect the elements of (MS) that are manifestation of (CP) (“only on
the assumption”) and (Quality) (“that he believes it”). Recall that
Grice holds that as soon the assertor is no longer believed to be
following (CP), not even implicature is possible. Interestingly,
Williams implicitly reaches the conclusion that this paper came to. If
*S* asserts a (MS) and *S* is following (CP), Williams not only would
hold that *S* will always at least flout (Quality), but that they can
always be “justifiably criticized.” Thus far, Williams definition of
(MP) has been perfectly consistent with the literature previously
covered, but the exception is this clause “justifiably criticized as
irrational.” When *S* asserts the (MS) *p* according to (CP), for
instance:

- (MSa) “God knows that I am a non-believer”,

there is a Blackian distinction between the meaning and the
significance. The meaning of *S*’s assertion can be criticized, but not
necessarily the significance, and Black would argue that this is what
counts. The meaning can fall victim to belief-based criticism because it
can be derived that *S* represents themselves as simultaneously
believing that “there is a god” and that *S* doesn’t believe in god.
Therefore, (MSa) violated (Quality) because it acknowledges the
existence of being that *S* does not believe in and (Manner) because
this makes (MSa) ambiguous. To further help in the analysis of (MS)s,
Williams has two classes of (MS):

- ​(a) *p* and I don’t believe that *p*
- (b) *p* and I believe that \\(\sim\\)*p*

He writes that the distinction is such that an (a)-type assertion
“expresses a commitment and the lack of it to the same belief,” while a
(b)-type assertion “expresses a commitment to directly opposed beliefs.”
Complete with preemptively labeling, (MSa) is of type (a), because it is
merely lacks belief as opposed to the stronger claim of nonexistence
(the distinction between weak and strong atheism, interestingly). This
machinery allows one to precisely distinguish non-(MS)s from (MS)s.

This paper has brought the reader from a potentially non-existent
knowledge through the general vocabulary of the field of knowledge and
assertion. Beginning with a summation of various accounts of assertion,
then moving to a definition of a problem for any account of assertion,
continuing through a response to that objection, and concluding with the
machinery required to fully respond to that problem, the reader is now
fully equipped to understand the deeper literature regarding knowledge
and assertion. By careful synopsis of influential works, a holistic and
consistent foundation for further study was outlined. In the case of
(MP), it is fully possible for the uninitiated to determine there is
something intuitively flawed about the assertion. But in order to fully
appreciate and respond to (MP), an understanding of at least three other
academics is required. To come up with a consistent objection to and
explicitly define the problem, the understanding of at least one of the
views which MacFarlane outlined is required. By assuming this rule of
assertion is valid, one is able to derive non-constitutive norms of
assertion. This gives rise to Black’s objection that (MP) breaks
language as there is some rule about an accord between an assertion and
belief or knowledge. This is where (1) or (2) fit snugly into Black’s
argument. This paper then concludes using Grice’s Maxims in synthesis
with (1) and (2) to define a model which explicitly define the rules by
which assertions work. Using these intimately interconnected assertive
apparatuses, this work outlines an accepted objection to the premise
that there is nothing inherently contradictory about (MP). With this
newly acquired field of knowledge, the reader was guided through the
essence of a deeper work by John Wiliams. A possibility for further
study with this knowledge is on the potential field of an ethics of
assertion. If it felt as though Grice was echoing Kantian ethics with
his own formulations, categories, and maxims, it is because his
assertive theories can fit snugly into Kantian ethical machinery. But
this is merely one example of what the reader is now capable of with
this understanding of knowledge and assertion. As the field further
disseminates into the undergraduate population, novel objections and
insights into assertion will develop, and an increasingly accurate
account of assertion will emerge.

# Works Cited

1. Black, M. *Problems of analysis: Philosophical essays*, chap. 3. Saying and Disbelieving. Greenwood Press, 1971, 46 – 57.
2. Grice, Paul. *Studies in the Way of Words*, chap. 2. Logic and Conversation. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1989, 22 – 40.
3. MacFarlane, John. ["What Is Assertion?"](http://johnmacfarlane.net/assertion.pdf) Assertion.
4. Moore, G.E. "Moore's paradox." En: Baldwin, T.(ed..), Selected Writings. Londres: Routledge : 207–212.
5. Williams, J.N. "Moorean absurdities and the nature of assertion." Australasian Journal of Philosophy 74.1 (1996): 135–149.
6. Williamson, T. [*Knowledge and its limits*](http://books.google.com/books?id=tMDqMUTg6gYC). Oxford Scholarship Online. Philosophy module. Oxford University Press, 2002.