Leibniz, Black, and Indiscernibles <small>by Paul Jones</small>
===============================================================

There are no two things that are the same. Consider the proposition
closely, that no two things are the same, because otherwise there would
not be two, surely. Intuitively, this seems remarkably inoffensive and
overly cautious an assertion. Yet there is a remarkable body of work
surrounding the claim, both in support and, even in the face of its
inoffensiveness, in opposition. The Principle of the Identity of
Indiscernibles is attributed to the last Renaissance man, Gottfried
Wilhelm Freiherr von Leibniz. It is foundational to his metaphysics,
along with his Principle of Sufficient Reason. Even before a rigorous
definition of the principle, observe that sentiments like “there are not
two things that are the same” are propositions. A proposition can be
true or false. What would it mean and how could it be that this
assertion be false? More precisely, if there exists a valid argument
that shows that there *could be* two things that are the same, what
would that mean for The Principle of the Identity of Indiscernibles? But
additionally, could there actually exist two things that are the same,
and what is the answer’s consequence to metaphysics? Max Black, in his
1952 paper ‘The Identity of Indiscernibles’, formulates an objection to
the Identity of Indiscernibles which answers both of these questions.
Does the Identity of Indiscernibles that Leibniz originally posited
provide any defense against Black’s opposition? I will answer these
questions, and in doing so, argue that Leibniz can satisfying respond to
Black’s objection to the Identity of Indiscernibles. The Principle of
Identity of Indiscernibles is found in two places in the Leibnizian
corpus: in 1686’s *Discourse on Metaphysics* (hereafter referred to by
its first word) section IX, and in 1689’s ‘Primary Truths’. In the
*Discourse*, he argues from his definition of individual substance. In
‘Primary Truths’, Leibniz argues from his concept containment theory of
truth. Within the natural world, the two formulations, considered at
once, will always logically yield the same truth values. Within
hypothetical worlds, the two can yield different truth values. The way
to distinguish the two formulations and their area of concentration is
by what principle Leibniz argues for them.

Beginning with former, his definition is proven from the definition of
what he calls an individual substance:

> ... [T]he nature of an individual substance or of a complete being is
> to have a notion so complete that is is sufficient to contain and to
> allow us to deduce from it all the predicates of the subject to which
> this notion is attributed.

Notice that if one has the a “notion so complete” that one then deduce
from it all predicates that can be said of it. It is on these grounds
that Leibniz claims that no two individual substances are exactly alike
according to Leibniz. If one is considering whether two of their
complete notions are equal, it is obvious whether or not it is the case.
Additionally, Leibniz asserts that from this it follows that substances
cannot neither be created or destroyed nor combined or split. Notice
that one deduces the predicates *from the* complete notions; he begins
with the complete notions. This will reflect in the following
formulation. This formulation is known as the Principle the Identity of
Indiscernibles in the literature, and it is the way it is found in
*Discourse*. Where $x$ and $y$ are anything and $P$ is a notion you can
attribute to it:
$$\forall x \forall y(x=y \rightarrow \forall P(Px \leftrightarrow Py))$$

The discussion that led Leibniz to this conclusion was of Alexander the
Great and the notion of “being a king.” This suggests that this
formulation is capable of being true for physical substances, like
Alexander, in addition to be suitable for non-physical substances like
logical propositions and numbers. This formulation is more appropriate
for this derivation because the only way the proposition after the
predication could be true, that $x$ equals $y$, is if they are equal in
actually being the same with different names. One must have the complete
concepts before getting the predication, like in the formal formulation.
Consider having two names which are used for Alexander the Great, $A_1$
and $A_2$ (such as in different languages). If one has a complete notion
about what both names refer to, one can get past the first proposition
after the predication as it is true. That is, with a complete notion of
both, one could say whether $A_1 = A_2$ and therefore that they share
all properties. In the language of Leibniz’s definition, if one has the
“notion so complete” of the two substances, one can deduce, and notice
the identity, all predicates that can be applied to it. Formally,

1.  $A_1$ has an equal complete notion to $A_2$.

2.  Therefore, all predicates can be said of $A_1$ can be said of $A_2$
    (otherwise 1 is not true).

Hereafter, the formulation and derivation of this Principle of the
Identity of Indiscernibles will be referred to as the “first
formulation.” This seems subtle and pedantic, but the next formulation
will show that this distinction of definition is necessary.

In ‘Primary Truths’, Leibniz similarly gives premises from which he
believes his principle follows from, but the argument is clearly
different. Here he defines what is called the concept containment theory
of truth. It is as follows:

> In every true proposition the concept of the predicate is somehow
> contained in the concept of the subject.

Statements like “$A$ is $A$” and “nothing is greater than itself” are to
be called identities. Leibniz argues that every true proposition is an
identity of this type. Leibniz asserts the part is equal to a part of
the whole and that what is equal to a part of a whole is less than the
whole. Therefore, the part is less than the whole. These propositions
are relation and conceptual, as opposed to the descriptive and empirical
variety, like “is a king” for Alexander. Following from these
propositions, amongst other things, is that in every true proposition
the concept of the predicate is somehow contained in the concept of the
antecedent. That is, if one has all predicates which apply to two
concepts, then one can know about equality, the “true proposition.” The
formulation which follows from this argument and definition is know as
the Principle of the Indiscernibility of Identicals in the literature.
Where $x$ and $y$ are concepts and $P$ is a notion:
$$\forall x \forall y(\forall P(Px \leftrightarrow Py) \rightarrow x=y)$$

While Leibniz uses “in nature” in this explanation of the principle, he
is more concerned with non-physical substances here, as those are the
premises he basis this on. Relation and identity statements like “$A$ is
not-not-A” and ‘nothing is greater than itself.’’ This formulation is
better for non-physical substance because assuming the first
formulation, there are no two distinct substances in nature for which
the first premise after the predication which would satisfy it.
Furthermore, the argument is from the concept containment theory of
truth, which begins by knowing all predicates which could be said of a
thing and then moving to their equality. This is not fitting for natural
things because it is impossible (except for God) to predicate over all
properties without first knowing equality. It is difficult to know all
the predicates which apply to natural systems, but with perfect
knowledge, it does follow. Hereafter, the formulation and derivation of
this Principle of the Identity of Indiscernibles will be referred to as
the “second formulation.” Furthermore, the equality statement after the
predication (that $x$ equals $y$) will be called “the equality clause”
and the other proposition after the predication will be called the
“share-all clause.”

If one assumes the first formulation is true, one knows that two things
being equal implies they share all notions. So this second formulation
works for all those natural individual substances that make the first
formulation true. Leibniz is not making any claims about two natural
individual substances which happen to somehow not actually be one
another, that is to satisfy the equality clause, but somehow share all
properties, which is to satisfy the share-all clause. It is possible for
someone with knowledge of equality to prove the antecedent, in fact the
antecedent is sometimes called “trivially true”, and that does imply
that the consequent will be true. With the complete notion of $x$ and
$y$, Leibniz can prove that $x = y$ by his definition of individual
substance. This implies that they share all properties. This implies
that should one use the same $x$ and $y$ in the second formulation, it
will also be true. This is not trivially true because there are
hypotheticals which could be said to share all properties and be equal
in that sense, as Max Black will show.

To conclude the exposition of a careful reading of Leibniz’s *Discourse*
and ‘Primary Truths’, this is a concise statement of what has been
argued for. There are two ways of formulating the identity of
indiscernible (or the indiscernibility of identicals). In the
*Discourse*, Leibniz uses his definition of individual substance to
argue for the formulation which has the equality clause before the
share-all clause, which this work calls the first formulation. This is
the better formulation for this derivation because if one is considering
two individual substances, by definition, one knows of their equality or
inequality. Equality implies they share all properties, as there are no
two identical individual substances. This teeters on tautology. In
‘Primary Truths’, Leibniz uses the Concept Containment Theory of Truth
to argue for the formulation which has the share-all clause before the
equal clause. The reason that neither formulation is a tautology will be
shown by how they could be imagined to be false, as Max Black will show.
The reason that Max Black’s counterexample is wrong is that it is not in
the proper domain considering the formulation, and it also does not
account for God’s knowledge, as this work will show.

Max Black, in his 1952 paper ‘The Identity of Indiscernibles,’ believes
he finds a counterexample to Leibniz’s principle (we shall see which
formulation). The style of the paper is between an $A$ and $B$, who are
indiscernible except that $A$ is a proponent of the principle of the
Identity of Indiscernibles. The counterexample that $B$ provides is by
use of a possible world argument. In this way he also entertains
objections, and in doing so he reveals which formulation he is using. To
more perfectly understand what Max Black managed to do with this paper,
this work will offer a careful and charitable reading before responding
for Leibniz.

Black begins by having $A$ assert that he believes PII to be obviously
true. In the same way, $B$ asserts that (s)he finds it to be obviously
false. Leibniz likely gets away with a lot because of the intuitiveness
of his law. Black then moves to getting a more precise argument for the
principle so that he may argue against it. After much rebuttal, $A$
comes up with a definition of the principle which $B$ finds acceptable,
and that is that “it is logically impossible for two things to have all
their properties in common.” While $B$ does not think that this is
mistaken, (s)he does think that is tautological and boring, and
responds:

> All you mean when you say “$a$ has the property of being identical
> with $a$” is that $a$ is $a$. And all you mean when you say \`\`$b$
> does not have the property of being identical with $a$" is that $b$ is
> not $a$. So what you have “proved” is that $a$ is $a$ and $b$ is not
> $a$, that is to say, $b$ and $a$ are different. Similarly, when you
> said that $a$, but not $b$, had the property of being different from
> $b$, you were simply saying that $a$ and $b$ were different.

This cutting criticism shows why Black was renowned for his linguistical
analysis, as it cuts the principle to its most basic form. This object
is distinct from the famed objection which follows it, and it will be
hereafter called the objection from linguistic content.

The next objection is the the one the paper is really known for. Having
shown that the previous formulation was tautological, $B$ moves from
defense of the possibility of the falsehood of the principle to offense
by counterexample:

> Isn’t it logically possible that the universe should have contained
> nothing but two exactly similar spheres? We might suppose that each
> was made of chemically pure iron, had a diameter of one mile,that they
> had the same temperature, color, and so on, and that nothing else
> existed. Then every quality and relational characteristic of the one
> would also be a property of the other. Now if what I am describing is
> logically possible, it is not impossible for two things to have all
> their properties in common.

The reason that this is a counterexample is that every property that
either sphere has is shared in full by the other sphere, yet there two
spheres. This means that the share-all clause is true, and the equality
clause is false. If Black is right about this counterexample, then
Leibniz must be wrong about his law at least sometimes, or that it is
not truly implication that is at work between the two conditions.

Black spends the rest of the paper raising his own convincing rebuttals
to the counterexample by use of $A$. The most convincing being that the
PII, either formulation, may not work in this mysterious two sphere
universe, but it so happens that we do not live in that universe. So it
may still be true of ours? Black, through $B$, still thinks that no.
Because it could be true of our universe, he thinks. Black invites us to
imagine that the relevant type of symmetry does apply to our universe
when he says, “everything that happened at any place would be exactly
duplicated at a place an equal distance on the opposite side of the
centre of symmetry.” This relies on the logical possibility of our
universe being symmetrical in this way, and the lack of evidence to
refute that the world is this way. Black concludes with the fact that in
the absence of any asymmetric observer or properties, a symmetrical
universe is a counterexample to the PII. Hereafter, this argument will
be called the symmetrical universe objection.

In light of having two formulations, which objection applies to which
formulation? The objection from linguistic content holds that statements
like “$a$ has the property of being identical with $a$” are tautologies
equivalent to “$a$ is $a$.” Notice that the objection formulates the
principle it rejects in the order of “it is logically impossible for two
things to have all their properties in common,” or the equivalent
contrapositive “it is the case that one thing has all properties in
common.” The objection formulates the statements used to assert the PII
in the form of going from the substance to the properties of the
substance, the “thing” to the “properties in common,” its equality or
inequality to its sharing all or not sharing all properties. This is why
Black is objection to what is here called the first formulation with his
objection from linguistic content.

But this objection fails because it relies on the confusion in the
difference between formal logical statements in some perfect language
with the natural language which humanity is forced to used. Black holds
that statements like “$a$ is $a$” and “$b$ is not $a$” are truisms
equivalent to the statement “that different things are different.” He is
right about them being equivalent to statements like “that different
things are different” but wrong about them being useless truisms which
carry no information. In natural languages like English, it is useful to
assert “$a$ is $a$” and “$b$ is not $a$” because it creates distinctions
in terms that were previously not realized to be the same, of “secret
identity.”

Because Leibniz uses Alexander the Great as an example to prove the
first formulation, it is fitting to use Alexander to defend the first
formulation. Consider two historians studying two sets of primary
documents in different languages, one in Greek and the other in Arabic.
The first historian calls his subject of study, which is unbeknownst to
her Alexander the Great, $A_1$. This historian learns from her Greek
documents that “$A_1$ was a king,” that “$A_1$ vanquished some
adversaries $D_1$ and $P_1$,” and that “$A_1$ may or may not have died a
natural death.” The second historian calls his subject of study, which
unbeknownst to him is also Alexander the Great, $A_2$. This historian
learns from his Arabic documents that “$A_2$ was a king,” that “$A_2$
vanquished some adversaries $D_2$ and $P_2$,” and that “$A_2$ *did not*
die a natural death, that $A_2$ was poisoned.” These two historians meet
at a conference and discuss with one another their study, and they are
astounded by the similarities of their subject, who they do not know is
the same person because of the ineffectiveness and imperfections of
practical natural language. After lengthy presentations on their
documents, the historian who studied the Arabic document proposes that
they are in fact studying *the same* person! That is, that for $x = A_1$
and that $y = A_2$, the second historian asserts that $x = y$. This is
not a truism because it can yield something interesting about the world.
In this case, the historians share can take confirmation about their
translations and studies of Alexander, and from the first formulation of
the PII, the first historian *learns* that Alexander did not die a
natural death! Of course, to determine that the historians can assert
the equality clause is a matter of epistemology that may or may not be
covered by Leibniz or actually be the case. But even so, that the truth
of equality clause would yield another truth for the first historian
shows that it is not a trivial affair.

More formally, Leibniz can respond to the objection that the first
formulation is yields and accepts only truisms by pointing out that
discrepancies of understanding in natural language allow the bearer to
create distinctions which come closer to a perfect language. He can
refer to his paper, ‘Of an Oragnum or Ars Magna of Thinking’, for
inspiration of what type of language would make the first formulation
useless, and what type of language the first formulation allows us to
move closer to. The assertion of equality of two things that were
previously believed to be distinct is a claim that bearers of natural
language can use to create meaning and learn new things from. The first
formulation is that on the premise of equality, it follows that all
properties are shared. It is not trivial because in the case where it is
unknown that the truth or falsity of the equality clause is, both cases
are meaningful. When it is false, the bearer is allowed to posit that
there is at least one property or substance not shared by the two thing
he referred to. When it is true, the bearer is allowed to conclude that
they share all properties and substances, and that only one name is
necessary. Perhaps the first formulation, as Black points out, is
trivially true for logical propositions and mathematical statements, for
*a priori* non-empirical knowledge. But the first formulation was
crafted by Leibniz from his definition of individual substance and the
example of Alexander, and in this way it useful for those empirical
affairs in natural language. The share-all clause is the consequent of
the truth of the equality clause, and determining the equality clause
can yield knowledge from the share-all clause which is otherwise
indeterminable with natural language.

The symmetrical universe objection should be considered a rejection of
the second formulation of PII. Notice that it moves from two objects
that share all properties but are not equal, meaning that the
implication does not work. Preemptively, before considering what Leibniz
would say to this argument, even Black, through his $A$ character,
expresses doubt about the validity of using logically possible separate
universes as counterexamples to predications. For instance, it may be
the case that the second formulation fails in Black’s two-sphere
universe, fails in the universe where our own is mirrored, and is still
true in every case in our own. Not only that, but in universes where
everything is non-identical, it would still be true by implication. But,
like Black, assuming the validity of possible worlds as counterexamples,
it is still possible for Leibniz to defend against Black’s symmetrical
world argument.

To begin with, Leibniz argues for the second formulation from the
concept containment theory of truth. It is not tailored for actual use
on empirical, physical concepts; but it is possible to try to use it, as
Black does. For Leibniz, also stemming from the the concept containment
theory of truth in ‘Primary Truths’, there is no atom. So there is
nobody but God that could actually know that two physical things share
all properties, for only God would be able to access them all at all
levels of granularity. Therefore, if one is considering whether or not
two objects satisfy the share-all clause, it is actually impossible,
according to Leibniz, for any being but God.

Does that mean that Black’s symmetrical universe objection does not
provide a counterexample, but instead makes the second formulation
unsatisfiable empirically and practically? No, and Leibniz has two ways
which he can reject the validity of Black’s symmetrical universe. The
first is from his definition of individual substances. Leibniz could say
that a symmetrical universe is not possible because it would mean that
there are two identical individual substances, which is impossible. This
is a strong argument only if one accepts Leibniz’s definition of
individual substance and its consequences, but it is very likely that
Black and other detractors would simply say that the definition is not
representative of the world.

Leibniz has an even more powerful argument for the impossibility of the
symmetrical universe objection. Black, in his paper, says that,

> In the absence of any asymmetric observer, I repeat, the spheres would
> have all their properties in common (including, if you like, the power
> to enter into different relations with other objects). Hence the
> principle of Identity of Indiscernibles false.

Leibniz would agree with the form of the argument, that assuming the
premises, the conclusion is true. But he would disagree that premises
are logically possible, which is Black’s entire argument. Leibniz would
argue against the logical possible of a universe with “absence of any
asymmetric observer” because for Leibniz, God is a necessary being. God
would make the universe asymmetrical because God is without limits for
Leibniz. Furthermore, because there is no atom and there can be no two
identical individual substances, Leibniz would likely hold that God
could distinguish the two supposedly indistinguishable iron balls from
one another without needing to make the universe asymmetrical to do so.
Therefore, when Black asks “Isn’t it logically possible that the
universe should have contained nothing but two exactly similar
spheres?”, Leibniz has two ways of responding, “No.”

This work began with Leibniz’s definition of the Principle of the
Identity of Indiscernibles, as it is found in his *Discourse on
Metaphysics*. Having found the precise formulation in that work, this
work moved on to find a subtly different formulation in Leibniz’s
‘Primary Truths.’ With these precise formulations in mind, this work
offered a careful reading of Max Black’s 1952 paper ‘The Identity of
Indiscernibles’ in an attempt to find precisely what his objections and
counterexamples are. Finally, from a Leibnizian framework, this work
rejected the conclusion that Black comes to. With regards to the first
formulation and the objection of linguistic content, Black’s argument
fails because of secret identities in natural language. With regards to
the second formulation and the objection of symmetrical worlds, Black’s
argument fails because of the Leibniz’s definition of individual
substance and Leibniz’s necessary existence of God.

Works Cited
===========

1.  Black, Max. “The Identity of Indiscernibles.” *Mind* 61.242 (1952): 153–164.
2.  Bolton, Martha. “Leibniz (01:730:416).” Rutgers University Lecture, Spring 2013.
3.  Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. “The Identity of Indiscernibles.” Online, 2013. URL http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/identity-indiscernible/
4.  von Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm Freiherr. *Discourse on Metaphysics*. 1686. 
5.  von Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm Freiherr. “Primary Truths.” .
