Pragmatic Epistemic Values, Time, and Psychology <small>by Paul Jones</small>
=============================================================================

The purpose of this paper is to craft consistent, workable notions of
epistemic value theory, belief set analysis, doxastic attitudes through
time, and use these notion to explore useful false beliefs and explain
psychological phenomena. First, this work will define in no uncertain
terms the concepts required for this project. This work will then use
pragmatic encroachment and Pareto principles to derive epistemic value
claims. After that, this work will argue that it is not necessary that
an agent doxastically hold a justifying belief, particularly when false
beliefs lead to knowledge. Finally, this work will use these notions to
explain two psychological phenomena, specifically source amnesia and
cognitive dissonance, adding credence to the distinctions and lending
insight about those two states.

Terms
-----

Here are the important definitions and distinctions used in my analysis
of epistemic value, time, and psychological phenomena in this section.
To begin broadly, the content of beliefs that this paper is concerned
with can be expressed propositionally, for instance “It is raining
outside.” or “Jones owns a Ford.” There is a distinction between a
propositional belief and doxastic attitude. A **propositional belief**
is a belief the agent could hold, but for one reason or another does not
hold. A **doxastic attitude** is a mental state the agent manifestly
holds towards a proposition. A propositional belief can serve as a
justifier for another propositional belief or doxastic attitude for an
agent. A **belief set** is the set-theoretic representation of a number
of beliefs, which are more precisely doxastic attitudes towards
propositions. The notation of $t_1, t_2, ..., t_n$ represents changes in
time, where $t_1$ is some time before $t_2$, and $t_2$ is before $t_3$,
etc.

### Attitudes


There are three varieties of doxastic attitudes: to assent, dissent, and
restraint. **Assenting** to $p$ is to accept $p$’s truth and
**dissenting** of $p$ is to reject $p$’s truth. To **restrain**[^1] from
$p$ is to neither assent to nor dissent from $p$. All of these attitudes
can be either manifest or latent. **Manifest attitudes** have been
considered by $S$ and **latent attitudes** have not been considered by
$S$, and both can be ascribed to $S$. Doxastic attitudes towards $p$
have been considered by $S$ if and only if $S$ has been presented with
and notices $p$. Doxastic attitudes towards $p$ can be ascribed of $S$
if and only if $S$’s belief set implies or requires $p$. A belief set
$B$ commits $S$ to a doxastic attitude $D$ towards a proposition $p$ if
and only if a member of $B$ logically implies or logically requires $p$.

Here are some instantiations which span the entire logical space of
doxastic attitudes. An example of my <span>manifestly assenting</span>
to a proposition would be if I said, “I have considered and accept that
I am writing a paper.” An example of an agent <span>latently
assenting</span> to a proposition would be, “The philosopher hasn’t
considered it, but her view means we can ascribed a contradiction to
her.” An example of my <span>manifestly dissenting</span> of a
proposition would be if I said, “I have considered and reject that
same-sex marriage is immoral.” An example of an agent <span>latently
dissenting</span> from a proposition would be, “Nozick hasn’t considered
it, but his view meant he had to reject closure.” An example of an agent
<span>manifestly withholding</span> from a proposition would be, “The
skeptic considered all propositions and neither accepted nor rejected
them.” An example of an agent <span>latently withholding</span> from a
proposition would be, “Russel hadn’t considered it, but his work neither
accepts nor reject quantum physics.”

### Attitudes through time


A doxastic attitude at any given time will be either present or not
present for an agent. A present attitude is one which an agent holds at
a particular time, and an non-present attitude is one which the agent
does not hold at a particular time. Of present and non-present
attitudes, there are manifest and latent varieties. Of non-present
attitudes, there are retrievable or irretrievable attitudes. There does
not exist present irretrievable attitudes as all present attitudes are
retrievable but not all retrievable attitude are present. An attitude D
is <span>**retrievable**</span> for an agent if and only if the agent is
able to hold that attitude (by prompt, by reasoning, etc.). An attitude
$D$ is <span>**irretrievable**</span> for an agent if and only if the
agent is not able to hold that attitude. In other words, when an
attitude is irretrievable for an agent, there exists no prompt or
reasoning which would bring about that attitude. An attitude $D$ towards
$p$ is <span>**manifest**</span> if and only if $S$ either did or does
adopt $D$. An attitude $D$ towards $p$ is <span>**latent**</span> if and
only if $S$ never adopted $D$.

Here are the necessary and sufficient conditions and instantiations
which span the entire logical space of doxastic states through time. An
example of my having a manifestly present attitude $D$ towards $p$ would
be if I were to say, “Right now, I assent to the White House being in
Washington D.C.” It is true that I am assenting to the proposition that
the White House is in D.C. right now, and this state can be ascribed to
me. Before I concocted that example, I had a latently present attitude
that the White House is in D.C. because I could have been ascribed the
attitude in light of my other beliefs. An example of $S$ having a
manifestly retrievable attitude $D$ towards $p$ would be if I said of
you, “You previously dissented and do not dissent now from Santa
Clauses’ existence[^2], but you can again at any time.” This state
obtains if and only if $S$ can $D$ towards $p$ and previously did $D$
towards $p$. Alternatively, an example of a latent retrievable attitude
would be if I said of you, “You do not dissent from $p$ but you can.”
where $p$ is “$1 + 2 = 99999$”[^3]. You can dissent from
“$1 + 2 = 99999$” and you (likely) never previously adopted this
dissent, so it is both latent and retrievable. An example of a manifest
irretrievable attitude $D$ towards $p$ could be someone very forgetful,
where you would say of them, “You used to know where your keys were but
can no longer remember.” This state obtains if and only if $S$
previously adopted $D$ towards $p$ and $S$ cannot $D$ towards $p$ any
more. Finally, an example of a latent irretrievable attitude would be a
very simple person, where you would say of them, “This simpleton does
not, cannot, and has never formed any attitude about quantum mechanics.”
This state obtains if and only if $S$ never adopted $D$ towards $p$ and
$S$ cannot $D$ towards $p$.

To amalgamate the logical space of possible attitudes with attitudes
through time, $S$ adopts (manifestly | latently) (present | retrievable
| irretrievable) (assent | dissent | restraint) towards $p$.

Pragmatic Encroachment and Values
---------------------------------

Pragmatic encroachment (PE) is a new development in epistemology that is
gaining traction amongst theorists. The thesis that the view espouses is
that differences in practical stakes can make a difference to knowledge
@goldman. Out of this movement in epistemology comes the what is known
as the Knowledge-Justification principle, which is:

> **KJ**: If you know that $p$, then $p$ is sufficiently warranted to
> justify you in actions or beliefs.

What is interesting about KJ is that consequences and become linked to
knowledge, typically being in the realm of knowledge. Notice that KJ
makes no attributions of knowledge, which is a tricky business for
analysis, but it does assert what a powerful intuition: that when you
know, you can act on it.

The paradigmatic case for PE and KJ comes from the comparison of two
instances of what is labeled **The Bank Case**. It is formulated by
imagining a husband and wife who are on their way home on a Friday. They
plan to stop by the bank on the way home to deposit their paychecks. As
they pass the bank, they notice the very long lines which typically
accrue at banks on Fridays. This is where the two cases diverge to
elucidate the PE thesis. In **Case A**, it is not especially important
in this case that the checks be deposited right away. In **Case B**, if
the paychecks are not deposited into our checking account before Monday
morning an important check will bounce. The check’s bouncing will leave
this couple is a very bad situation. In both cases, the husband suggests
that the couple wait until Saturday morning to deposit the check. In
Case A, the wife responds “Maybe the bank won’t be open tomorrow. Lots
of banks are closed on Saturdays.” The husband then says, “No, I know
it’ll be open. I was just there two weeks ago on Saturday. It’s open
until noon.” and the couple drive on. In Case B, the wife reminds the
husband of what is at stake. Remaining as confident as he was before
that the bank will be open, the husband says “Well, no. I’d better go in
and make sure.”

If KJ is true, then the husband’s knowledge, which does not change
between the two cases, should justify his actions. Because the stakes
change, the husband’s knowledge do not change, and the couples action do
change, PE posits that practical interests must affect knowledge
attribution. This work will not explore the counterexamples or motivate
this view any further, but instead assume its truth and see what it
entails. A careful consideration of Case A and Case B will reveal that
it is not only practical stakes that are at play in the Bank Case.
Notice that for the husband and wife to change the way they act
warranted by their belief is because they *value* that their, say, home
does not get foreclosed on because of that bounced check. This link
between knowledge and values is more exciting than simply stakes,
because it means that different belief sets justify actions that are in
line with different values. What follows from this is that we can
evaluate epistemic features in terms of value theories, because in the
Bank Case, the husband and wife’s valuing their practical interest is
what affected their resolve to act on their belief.

Words used to describe value are “good,” “bad,” and “neutral.” What
candidates are there for epistemic goodness or badness? What is
happening in the Bank Case is more a question for rational choice theory
(“Is it rational for me on this belief?”) and ethical theory (“Is it
moral to act on this belief?”), but it is possible to limit the
discussion to epistemic value. It follows from PE and KJ that what is
epistemically valuable is true belief, because true beliefs are far more
likely to sufficiently warrant and justify an agent in actions or other
beliefs. Of course false beliefs can justify an agent in action, but it
is not necessary as it is with true belief. Take the Bank Case, if the
husband is evaluating two possible beliefs he can assent to, “The bank
is open on Saturday.” and “The bank is not open on Saturday.”, he is
always going to value the true alternative more than the false
alternative. This is because practical interests, moral beliefs, and
rationality will more often than not benefit from true belief rather
than false belief, especially in the long run.

It is possible and fruitful to compare epistemic features *qua*
epistemic features. The best way of systemizing these sorts of
comparisons are Pareto principles, which this work now turns to. All
this work needs the reader to grant is that generally true beliefs are
epistemically better than false beliefs in the long run, and a robust
belief set analysis theory follows.

### Pareto principles


The Pareto principle is named after the Italian economist Vilfredo
Pareto (1848-1923) who showed that “a social state is said to be
Pareto-efficient when there is no feasible alternative to it in which at
least on individual is better of while no individual is worse off.” To
illustrate how Pareto principle’s work, The Routledge Encyclopedia of
Philosophy crafts this example,

> Suppose a large basket of fruit is shared among a group in some way or
> another: one apple, two peaches, a dozen peaches each, for instance.
> If the fruit can be exchanged so that at least some people get more
> enjoyment from what they have, and no one gets less, the Pareto
> principle instructs us to do so; indeed, it instructs us to carry on
> exchanging until no more improvements of this kind are possible.
> @craig1998routledge [pg. 228]

There are two interesting features of this example. The first is that it
involves the analysis of which basket of fruit is best involves
comparing all logically possible baskets of fruit. The second is that
what makes a particular basket of fruit better than another particular
basket of fruit is people’s enjoyment, which is a value claim. If you
value enjoyment with regards to baskets of fruit, then if one basket of
fruit contains substitutes a piece of fruit that brings one more person
more enjoyment and no person less enjoyment, then that basket of fruit
is better all things considered.

### Belief Set Analysis


Epistemology is not concerned with baskets of fruit, however. Beliefs
sets are one of the subjects epistemologists do want to study, and they
fit very well into Pareto principles. Just like the basket of fruit
example compares every logically possible permutation on the members of
the basket of fruit, epistemological Pareto principles contain every
logically possible belief set in their domain.

Imagine two belief sets in relation to a fixed agent $S$, $B_1$ and
$B_2$. These two sets contain all the same manifest and latent
retrievable attitudes towards propositions. Should one compare the two
and consider their candidacy for assent, these two sets are obviously
equal. If $B_1$ contains one more true belief than $B_2$ and no more
cases of false belief, then comparing these belief sets *qua* belief
sets yields that $B_1$ is all things considered epistemically better
than $B_2$. That is, it is a better candidate for assent. Alternatively,
if $B_1$ contains one more false belief than $B_2$ and no more cases of
true belief, then comparing these belief sets *qua* belief sets yields
that $B_1$ is all things considered epistemically worse than $B_2$. To
capture this in a formal principle, here is Epistemological Pareto
Principle:

> **(EPP)** If an individual can assent to an alternative belief set $B$
> with either an added known proposition or a removed false belief, then
> the individual must assent to $B$[^4].

The More True Beliefs Principle and its converse follows from EPP:

> **(MTB)** A belief set $B$ with $n$ true beliefs is epistemically
> better for an agent $S$ than the same belief set with $n - 1$ true
> beliefs.

> **(FTB)** A belief set $B$ with $n - 1$ true beliefs is epistemically
> worse for an agent $S$ than the same belief set with $n$ true beliefs.

The Fewer False Beliefs Principle and its converse also follows from
EPP:

> **(FFB)** A belief set $B$ with $n$ false beliefs is epistemically
> better for an agent $S$ than the same belief set with $n + 1$ false
> beliefs.

> **(MFB)** A belief set $B$ with $n + 1$ false beliefs is epistemically
> worse for an agent $S$ than the same belief set with $n$ false
> beliefs.

Useful False Beliefs in Time
----------------------------

To show the explanatory and analytical power of my accounts of doxastic
attitudes through time and belief set analysis, I will employ them in
raising and solving a problem that it seems Klein is committed to if he
accepts epistemic value claims like FFB.

### Is FFB a Problem for Klein’s Useful False Beliefs?


Peter Klein’s “Useful False Beliefs” outlines the necessary and
sufficient conditions for a false belief to give rise in an agent to a
case of knowledge. This is the perfect target for both belief set
analysis and time analysis, as false belief leading to true beliefs
creates contradicting belief sets. Beginning with the Appointment Case:

> <span>**(AC)**</span> On the basis of his apparent memory, Klein
> believes that his secretary told him on Friday that he has an
> appointment on Monday with a student. From that belief, Klein infers
> that he does have an appointment on Monday. Suppose, further, that
> Klein does have an appointment on Monday, and that his secretary told
> him so. But she told him that on Thursday, not Friday. Klein knows
> that he has an appointment even though he inferred from his belief
> from the false proposition that his secretary told him on Friday that
> he has an appointment on Monday. @Klein2008-KLEUFB

As Monday draws closer for Klein, the logically possible doxastic states
that he can hold with regard to $uf$, that is that “My secretary told me
on Friday that I have an appointment on Monday with a student.”. Because
Klein has and can believe $uf$, it is impossible that the attitude
become latent. The only possible states that Klein can have are:

1.  A manifestly present attitude that $uf$.

2.  A manifestly retrievable attitude that $uf$.

3.  A manifestly irretrievable attitude that $uf$.

The belief sets Klein holds in cases (1) and (2) are worse than the
belief set in case (3) by FFB. Where the subscripts correspond to the
case, $B_1$ and $B_2$ either presently or retrievably contain manifest
or latent assent, respectively, towards $uf$, which is false and $B_3$
latently restrains from $uf$. Where $n$ is the number of other false
beliefs Klein has in $B_3$, $n + 1$ is the number of false beliefs Klein
has in $B_1$ and $B_2$. Therefore, FFB prescribes that $B_1$ and $B_2$
are all things considered worse than $B_3$. Klein, the theorist, is at a
crossroads where either he is committed to thinking FFB is not
necessarily tue or there is some more subtle point which is not
understood about what happens to belief over time.

I will argue the latter, where I think that FFB holds for this case and
it does not affect Klein’s knowledge about his meeting to drop the false
belief about what day his secretary told him. This is important even if
the motivation for FFB is not accepted, because having a view which
requires an agent to hold on to false belief to continue justifying an
instance of knowledge is highly questionable.

### Isolated Time Case


To isolate the effect of time on knowledge, consider this case without
useful false beliefs:

> <span>**(PT)**</span> $S$ is in geometry class, and the teacher is
> going through the argument for the Pythagorean theorem. $S$ follows
> along closely, understanding each step. After some consideration and
> verification, $S$ comes to believe the Pythagorean theorem at $t_1$.
> Some time later at $t_2$, $S$ encounters a problem involving a
> triangle where the theorem is one possible way to get the solution.
> Without considering the proof, $S$ applies the theorem and gets the
> correct answer.

Assume that at $t_1$, $S$ has knowledge. The proposition believed, $p$,
is roughly that “$a^2 + b^2 = c^2$”. What doxastically justifies $p$ for
$S$ at $t_1$ is the proof of $p$. At $t_1$, $S$ has manifestly present
manifest assent towards $p$ and the proof of $p$. There are only three
logical possibilities about $S$’s relationship with the theorem’s proof
at $t_2$:

1.  $S$ has a manifestly present assent towards $p$ on grounds of the
    proof;

2.  $S$ has a manifestly retrievable assent towards the proof, but still
    manifestly present assent towards $p$;

3.  $S$ has a manifestly irretrievable assent towards $p$ on grounds of
    the proof, but still manifestly present assent towards $p$.

In (1), it is obvious that $S$ knows that $p$ at $t_2$ because the state
is exactly the same as $t_1$, and at $t_1$ $S$ has knowledge by nature
of the case. In (2), $S$ still knows that $p$ because if there exists a
manifestly retrievable propositional belief that would place $S$ in the
same state at $t_2$ as in $t_1$, then $S$ has knowledge. By nature of
the case, $S$ has knowledge in (1) and this second state ends up the
same as in (1) at $t_3$ should $S$ be prompted in any way for the proof.
The contentious case is (3), where $S$ has a manifestly irretrievable
attitude towards the justification for the true belief $p$. The
consequence of not ascribing knowledge to the agent in (3) would be that
agents could not know that which they can not immediately justify to
challengers or to themselves. This would be a case where agents have
irretrievable propositional justification for a true belief.

### Cases like (3) Constitute Knowledge


Without these cases being knowledge, there is a very large set of true
beliefs that manifest presently that could not be knowledge. For
instance, imagine yourself as $S$. If you know the Pythagorean theorem,
can you recall the proof of the Pythagorean theorem? Is the proof of the
Pythagorean theorem a member of your set of retrievable attitudes? If it
is, it is an impressive case of recollection, but it does not affect
your knowledge as even if you could not, you could still have knowledge
of the theorem. Many people that *know* the Pythagorean theorem in the
sense which we use the word “know” likely do not have the mathematically
rigor required of adequate justification for the theorem, and it is
because they do not need it! Setting the standard for knowledge such
that every member in the set of an agent’s present attitudes has to have
its justification also included in the set of present attitudes means
knowledge requires omniscience. Setting the standard for knowledge such
that every member in the set of an agent’s manifestly or latently
present attitudes has to have its justifying belief included in the set
of retrievable attitudes is more reasonable, but still unnecessary as
some examples will show.

Cases like (3) are where $S$’s justifying attitude towards $p$ moves
from the set of manifestly present attitudes to the set of latently
present attitudes, manifestly retrievable attitudes, or manifest
irretrievable attitudes. This process is an important function of our
limited brain to only keep relevant information. The fact that there
exists a latently present attitude that was once part of the agent’s
manifestly present attitudes must be sufficient for knowledge.

For another instance, consider language. If you were to use a word in
completely the correct context and were grammatically flawless, and I
were to challenge you about it, you would not likely recite a dictionary
definition or etymological explanation for the word’s correctness. You
would have no source or rich sense of justification for your use of the
word, that is a present manifest or retrievable attitude as a justifier,
but there are plenty of latently present or retrievable justifiers
because your word choice was a valid one. You could cite a dictionary,
encyclopedia, or etymological analysis, but that is not because is is
necessary to provide justification to yourself or your epistemic
community for knowledge[^5], it is because you have knowledge of the
word’s correct use. If cases that do not have justification are not
knowledge, then we do not know the meaning of any of the utterances
which we cannot give quite complicated definitions and analyses for.

There are extreme versions of this that still constitute knowledge. For
instance, consider knowledge of one’s own birthday (or any knowledge
from one’s infancy). Since I prompted you, your birthday likely entered
your set of manifestly present attitudes. If asked to justify the belief
that one’s own birthday is on a certain day (for anyone above the age of
reason), there is no retrievable attitude that could justify it or
argument which could derive it. Yet obviously people know their
birthdays. Perhaps a sufficiently weak condition for knowledge is that
for any belief in the set of manifestly present attitudes, there must be
a justifying member in at least the set of manifestly irretrievable
attitudes[^6].

### Formulation


This suggests that the rules for justification may be different for
beliefs through time. Because agents do not believe propositions in the
“current time slice” alone. Rather, the subjects of epistemology belief
through time, with all of its affects, whether damaging or, less
plausibly for humans, ameliorative. If we try to capture these
intuitions into necessary and sufficient conditions for beliefs through
time, this is the result: Where $q$ is the belief that justifies $p$:

1.  $p$ is true,

2.  $q$ is valid propositional justification for $p$,

3.  $q$ and $p$ are members of manifestly present attitudes for $S$ at
    $t_1$,

4.  $q$ leaves the set of manifestly present attitudes at $t_2$,

5.  Through $t_3$, $q$ continues to propositionally justify $p$ for $S$.

If this formulation is rejected, there needs to be some other account of
how we retain knowledge through time or it is just a matter of
forgetting some basic beliefs before we have knowledge of nothing. The
final condition will be violated, as intuition expects it to be, if $q$
contains a clause like “unless ...” and the agent does not recognize
that the clause is relevant. It is important that what is forgotten is
harmless in this way.

In (PT), $S$ knows that $p$ in cases (1), (2), and (3). $S$ knowing that
$p$ in cases (1) and (2) will be uncontentious, and case (3) will still
be knowledge after some analysis. Case (3) is knowledge because
otherwise the standard for knowledge is too high for agents to hold on
to knowledge through time. Somewhat like useful false beliefs, so long
as there continues to exist a “path not taken” at $t_2$ between a
doxastic attitude at $t_2$ by $S$ and the propositional justification
that was doxastic for $S$ at $t_1$, then $S$ has knowledge.

### Application to (AC) and an Explanation of the Intuitiveness


This is how Klein can both permissibly drop his false belief about the
secretary and retain his knowledge about the student, which I call case
(3). Using my account of permissibly dropping a justifying belief, the
analysis is as such: Klein’s manifestly present assent to $p$, that he
has a meeting with the student on Monday, is true. His manifestly
present assent to $uf$ is valid justification for $p$, and it
doxastically justifies $p$ at $t_1$. In case (3), Klein’s belief in $q$
moves to the set of manifest irretrievable assent at $t_2$. Through
$t_3$, $uf$ continues to propositionally justify $p$ for Klein. Because
there is no condition that could change the justification relationship
between $uf$ and $p$, for instance “$uf$ unless the student emails you”,
it is entirely harmless that Klein forget this belief. On top of that,
Klein is dropping a belief in accordance with FFB, which explains why we
want to let Klein drop his false belief and keep his knowledge of the
truth. Because Klein’s set of manifestly present and manifestly
retrievable attitudes $B_{pr}$ has $n$ false beliefs at $t_2$ compared
to $n + 1$ false beliefs in the same set at $t_1$, $B_{pr}$ at $t_2$ is
epistemically better all things considered than $B_{pr}$ at $t_1$.

### Conclusion for Useful False Beliefs in Time


The language found in *Terms* gives us the ability to adequately
describe and explain what happens to a knowledge and particularly
justification through time, and this is a virtue of the “manifest vs.
latent,” “present vs. non-present,” and “retrievable vs. irretrievable”
lexicon. FFB, which follows from EPP, gives a good account of why an
epistemologist should want to be able to drop false beliefs even when
they are justifiers. Furthermore, the different sets that beliefs can be
said to be members of through time allows us to keep the standard for
knowledge high enough without being too high. An interesting topic for
another work would be applying this conception of useful false beliefs
in time to foundationalism, where a candidate for foundational beliefs
could be latent, non-present, irretrievable attitudes towards false
propositions, such as “My perceptions are reliable.” If this
foundationalism from false beliefs could lead to knowledge, then it may
concede to the skeptic what the skeptic wants with regards to
meta-worries while keeping the commonsense Moorean notions of hands and
fires.

Psychological Phenomena
-----------------------

For too long have epistemologists of the analytic school stuck only to
*a priori* methods for getting to the truth. Alvin Goldman has proposed
what he calls meliorative epistemology. Broadly speaking, the thesis is
that epistemologists should come to understand and engage the
discoveries of their peers in psychology, cognitive science, and
neuroscience. Additionally, the thesis is that these fields should give
us an increasingly better story of how we should conduct our
intellectual lives, making lucid the glitches in our cognition. This
work seeks to be a part of this, specifically with regard to explaining
psychological phenomena in no uncertain terms, the typical analytic
philosophical tool.

### Source Amnesia


The intuition behind source amnesia is that feeling when you have when
one recalls some belief while failing to remember how one came to adopt
the attitude towards the believed proposition. It is perfect for the
terms analyzed here, as it is necessarily the product of beliefs and
justification through time. For instance, if one were to remember a
quote from a Shakespeare play without remember *which* play or perhaps
even that the quote is from Shakespeare. Another good example is case
(3) type examples, where Klein forgets which day his secretary told him
of the meeting with a student but remembers that he has a meeting with a
student. Here is a psychological source on the topic:

> *Source amnesia* refers to a situation in which one remembers some
> fact or piece of information, but forgets the source of the
> information. For example, we might remember specific information about
> a book or movie, but be unable to recollect where that information was
> learned. Source attributions differentiate autobiographical even
> memories (from more general knowledge) and source amnesia has been
> described as a for of memory impairment for spatiotemporal context
> since it reflects content devoid of the context.
> @psychology2003clinical [pg. 538]

To come from an *a priori* logical possibility conception of beliefs
through time, this work can describe such a state with the following
necessary and sufficient conditions:

1.  $D_1$ towards $p$ justifies $D_2$ towards $q$ for $S$

2.  $D_1$ is manifestly present for $S$ at $t_1$

3.  $D_2$ becomes manifestly present for $S$ on basis of $D_1$ towards
    $p$ at $t_1$

4.  $D_1$ becomes manifestly irretrievable to $S$ at $t_2$

5.  $D_2$ is either manifestly retrievable or manifestly present to $S$
    through $t_2$.

To motivate each condition by directly engaging with the psychology text
would show consistency between the *a priori* conceptions and the
empirical claim of source amnesia. (1) is analytically required for a
believer to come to believe “some fact or piece of information”
non-arbitrarily. (2) comes from “but forgets the source of the
information,” where the word “forgets” means that the belief was
previously present. (3) is how a believer comes to believe on the view
in this work, and is consistent with uncontentious conceptions without
“manifest” talk. (4) is “forgets the source of the information”
obtaining. (5) is “[$S$] remembers some fact or piece of information”
obtaining.

Furthermore, FTB explains the intuition that not being able to remember
a source for a belief is epistemically bad.

### Cognitive Dissonance


The intuition behind cognitive dissonance is that it is possible and
often happens that we have inconsistent beliefs. This state,
psychologists say, leads to feelings of discomfort, anger, and
rationalizing. For instance, imagine a smoker who knows full well what
each cigarette does. Or perhaps a religious scientist who struggles to
consistently hold both belief systems. Or Slavoj Zizek’s example of
American ecological ideology, where we, as a society, know that we are a
cause of global climate change, yet use disposable plastic cups and
gasoline everyday.

> Dissonance is aroused when people are confronted with information that
> is inconsistent with their beliefs. If the dissonance is not reduced
> by changing one’s belief, the dissonance can result in restoring
> consonance through misperception, rejection or refutation of the
> information, seeking support from others who share the beliefs, and
> attempting to persuade others. @dillard2002persuasion [pg. 101]

Using the terms defined here from the logically possible belief sets
through time, the necessary and sufficient conditions for $S$ being in a
state of cognitive dissonance defined as such are:

1.  $S$ adopts attitude $D_1$ towards $p$.

2.  $S$ adopts attitude $D_2$ towards $q$

3.  $p$ and $q$ either themselves contradict or imply a contradiction.

The author of this work predicts that those cognitive dissonant
attitudes that are latent will be harder to diagnose and fix than those
that are manifest. However, manifestly cognitively dissonant belief sets
are likely more uncomfortable. Furthermore, epistemic Pareto principles
can explain why these belief sets containing contradicting members are
bad. If a belief set contains a contradiction, it is logically
impossible that it does not contain at least one falsehood. Therefore,
by MFB, belief sets that that place $S$ in a state of cognitive
dissonance are epistemically worse than those that do no (without
expunging cases of true belief in the process).

Conclusion
----------

This paper covered four goals: to explore the logically possible space
of attitudes through time, to derive epistemic value principles for
belief sets, and to apply these developments to philosophical and
psychological ideas through time. Specifically, this work applied
attitudes through time to Klein’s conception of useful false beliefs,
and then explained the result using epistemic value principles.
Furthermore, the psychological states of source amnesia and cognitive
dissonance were explicated by the same attitudes through time.
Additionally, the badness and goodness of these states was explained by
the value principles. There is plenty more work to do towards all these
goals, but this shall serve as a sufficient beginning.

[^1]: This is usually called “withholding.”

[^2]: That is, until you read that sentence, which is what makes this
    difficult to talk about.

[^3]: $p$ is separated so that the sentence was true when you read it.

[^4]: This formulation uses a structure found in @sen1970impossibility
    [pg. 153].

[^5]: For more on this, see @Kornblith2008-KORKNN

[^6]: Where the hierarchy continues to latent retrievable attitudes,
    manifestly retrievable attitudes, latently present attitudes, and
    then manifestly present attitude
