Useful False Beliefs in Time <small> by Paul Jones</small>
==========================================================

Thesis
------

The purpose of this paper is to show that it is not necessary that an
agent doxastically hold a justifying belief, particularly when false
beliefs lead to knowledge. This is both a counterintuitive and possible
state for epistemic agents to hold, where agents can reason from a false
belief to a true belief and are not, I will argue, required to continue
holding the false belief to have knowledge. In his analysis of the
necessary and sufficient conditions for a useful false belief, Klein
uses only the “current time slice” analysis in approaching whether an
agent $S$ knows that $p$. An entire class of possible cases occur over
time, with all the effects that time has on memory, recall, and both the
intuition and analysis of knowledge. First, this paper will define the
terms being used for the sake of analytical unambiguity. Second, this
paper will add changes in time to Klein’s basic case and the definitions
from the previous portion, and show why it appears that Klein is
committed to violating a commonsense principle. Then, this paper will
provide an account of how changes in time can yield or not yield
knowledge. Finally, this paper will resolve the problem of Klein’s being
committed to violating a commonsense principle.

Definitions
-----------

I will identify and explain some necessary definitions used in analyzing
useful false beliefs through time. The content of beliefs that this
paper is concerned with can be expressed propositionally, for instance
“It is raining outside.” or “Jones owns a Ford.” There is a distinction
between propositional and doxastic belief and justification. A
propositional belief is a belief the agent could hold, but for one
reason or another does not hold. It becomes justification when the
belief justifies another. Doxastic belief is a mental state the agent
actually holds towards a proposition, and it becomes doxastic
justification if the belief actually justifies another belief. I will
use the notation of $t_1, t_2, ..., t_n$ to represent changes in time,
where $t_1$ is some time before $t_2$, and $t_2$ is before $t_3$, etc.

There are two types of possible propositional beliefs which this
analysis will use, where there are retrievable propositional beliefs and
irretrievable propositional beliefs. Retrievable propositional beliefs
must be beliefs that were previously held at time $t_1$, but by virtue
of some process of memory, are no longer explicitly held by $S$ at time
$t_2$. What makes the propositional belief “retrievable” is that if
challenged, by either herself or her surrounding, $S$ would retrieve and
come to explicitly believe $p$ again. Another descriptive term for this
type of case is background belief. Conversely, irretrievable
propositional belief is a proposition $p$ that $S$ cannot come to
believe because $S$ either: (1) never believed $p$, (2) cannot remember,
recall, recollect, etc, $p$.

I will make use of an uncontentious principle, which I will refer to as
the “Less False Belief” principle:

> **(LFB)** If $S$ has a set of beliefs $B$ with members
> $b_1, b_2, ..., b_n$ and one of the beliefs, say $b_x$, is false, then
> if $S$ stops believing $b_x$, $S$ has an epistemically *better* set of
> beliefs.

I use the term better to compare belief sets *as belief sets* and I am
not using the term in an ethical sense. If “better” is to mean anything
in an epistemological sense, it is to mean less false beliefs and more
true beliefs. (LFB) captures this.

Problem for Useful False Beliefs
--------------------------------

Before discussing how changes in time affect knowledge, here is the most
basic case from Klein’s chapter and a discussion of why there is a
problem. Beginning with the Appointment Case:

> **(AC)** On the basis of his apparent memory, Klein believes that his
> secretary told him on Friday that he has an appointment on Monday with
> a student. From that belief, Klein infers that he does have an
> appointment on Monday. Suppose, further, that Klein does have an
> appointment on Monday, and that his secretary told him so. But she
> told him that on Thursday, not Friday. Klein knows that he has an
> appointment even though he inferred from his belief from the false
> proposition that his secretary told him on Friday that he has an
> appointment on Monday.

As Monday draws closer for Klein, there are three possible doxastic
states that he can take on with regards to $uf$, which is “My secretary
told me on Friday that I have an appointment with a student.” Let the
belief formation time be $t_1$ and now that Klein finds himself at
$t_2$, the three states are: (1) that his memory of $uf$ perseveres, (2)
that $uf$ leaves his immediately available thoughts but remains
retrievable, becoming a retrievable propositional belief, and (3) that
$uf$ is irretrievably forgotten, becoming an irretrievable propositional
belief. In case (1), the case remains unchanged, and thus if Klein has
knowledge by his analysis of useful false beliefs, he has knowledge
here. In case (2), the case is a very near to (1), insofar as if Klein
were to think about his meeting or was asked to justify the belief, he
would use his retrievable propositional belief in $uf$ to return to the
state of case (1). But what of (3)? Here Klein is in a state where he
believes the truth about his appointment on Monday, but cannot recall
the source, the evidence, or any justification. Yet Klein’s forgetting
of this false belief is actually good under the (LFB) principle. To
argue that it is epistemically bad for an agent to drop a false belief
in the case that it justifies a true belief is untenable; it violates a
lot of intuition. We are at a crossroads where either (LFB) is not
necessarily true or there is some more subtle point which is not
understood about what happens to belief over time.

I will argue the latter, where I think that (LFB) holds for this case
and it does not affect Klein’s knowledge about his meeting to drop the
false belief about what day his secretary told him.

Time Case and Initial Discussion
--------------------------------

To isolate the effect of time on knowledge, consider this case without
useful false beliefs but with all the distinctions from *Definitions*.

> **(PT)** $S$ is in geometry class, and the teacher is going through
> the argument for the Pythagorean theorem. $S$ follows along closely,
> understanding each step. After some consideration and verification,
> $S$ comes to believe the Pythagorean theorem at $t_1$. Some time later
> at $t_2$, $S$ encounters a problem involving a triangle where the
> theorem is one possible way to get the solution. Without considering
> the proof, $S$ applies the theorem and gets the correct answer.

Assume that at $t_1$, $S$ has knowledge. The proposition believed, $p$,
is roughly that “$a^2 + b^2 = c^2$”. What doxastically justifies $p$ for
$S$ at $t_1$ is the proof of $p$. There are three possibilities about
$S$’s relationship with the theorem at $t_2$:

1.  $S$ still has the proof in immediately available mental states, that
    is, that the justification for the theorem is still a doxastic
    attitude;

2.  $S$ no longer has the proof in immediately available mental states,
    but could easily bring it to mind if challenged or if needed, making
    the proof a retrievable propositional belief;

3.  $S$ no longer has the proof in immediately available mental states,
    and could not bring it to mind if challenged or if needed, making
    the proof an irretrievable propositional belief.

In (1), it is obvious that $S$ knows that $p$ at $t_2$ because the state
is exactly the same as $t_1$, and at $t_1$ $S$ has knowledge by nature
of the case. In (2), $S$ still knows that $p$ because if there exists a
retrievable propositional belief that would place $S$ in the same state
at $t_2$ as in $t_1$, then $S$ has knowledge. By nature of the case, $S$
has knowledge in (1) and this second state ends up the same as in (1).
The contentious case is (3), where $S$ has no retrievable propositional
belief regarding the justification for the belief in $p$. The
consequence of not ascribing knowledge to the agent in (3) would be that
agents could not know that which they can not immediately justify to
challengers or to themselves. This would be a case where agents have
irretrievable propositional justification for a true belief.

Without these cases being knowledge, there is a large set of true
beliefs that we hold that cannot be knowledge. For instance, if you know
the Pythagorean theorem, can you recall the proof of the Pythagorean
theorem? Can you at all justify the Pythagorean theorem? If you can, it
is an impressive case of recollection, but it does not affect your
knowledge as even if you could not, you could still have knowledge of
it. Many people that *know* the Pythagorean theorem in the sense which
we use the word “know” likely do not have the mathematically rigor
required of adequate justification for the theorem, and it is because
they do not need it! Setting the standard for knowledge as such will
lead to skepticism in the wrong places. It is important that in cases
like (3) and in cases where the agent forgets the justifying factor, the
fact that there exists a propositional justifying chain that was once
part of the agent’s doxastic attitudes must be sufficient for knowledge.
Requiring that agents hold all of these doxastic states through time or
“holding them somewhere retrievable” is implausible and unnecessary for
the common conception of knowledge. It should not be contentious that
these states are knowledge because there exist true beliefs that we hold
that we would intuitively ascribe knowledge to.

For another instance, consider language. If you were to use a word in
completely the correct context and were grammatically flawless, and I
were to challenge you about it, you would not likely recite a dictionary
definition or etymological explanation for the word’s correctness. You
would have no source or rich sense of justification for your use of the
word, but there are plenty of possible justifiers because your word
choice was a valid one. You could cite a dictionary, encyclopedia, or
etymological analysis, but that is not because is is necessary to
provide justification to yourself or your epistemic community for
knowledge, it is because you have knowledge of the word’s correct use, a
true belief which has justification in the light of the proposition’s
truth. If cases that do not have justification are not knowledge, then
we do not know the meaning of any of the utterances which we cannot give
quite complicated definitions and analyses for. There are extreme
versions of this that still constitute knowledge. For instance, consider
knowledge of one’s own birthday (or any knowledge from one’s infancy).
If asked to justify the belief that one’s own birthday is on a certain
day (for anyone above the age of reason), there is no doxastic attitude
that could perceptually justify it or argument which could derive it.
Yet obviously people know their birthdays, and it is because there
existed a doxastic justifying belief in the past that justified the
formation of the belief but does not need to reinstantiate the
justification for the agent to continue knowing.

This suggests that the rules for justification may be different for
beliefs through time. Because agents do not believe propositions in the
“current time slice” alone. Rather, the subjects of epistemology belief
through time, with all of its affects, whether damaging or, less
plausibly for humans, ameliorative. If we try to capture these
intuitions into necessary and sufficient conditions for beliefs through
time, this is the result: Where $q$ is the belief that justifies $p$:

1.  $p$ is true,

2.  $q$ is valid justification for $p$,

3.  $q$ doxastically justifies $p$ for $S$ at $t_1$,

4.  $S$ can lose the belief that $q$ at $t_2$,

5.  Through $t_3$, $q$ continues to propositionally justify $p$ for $S$.

If this formulation is rejected, there needs to be some other account of
how we retain knowledge through time or it is just a matter of
forgetting some basic beliefs before we have knowledge of nothing. The
final condition will be violated, as intuition expects it to be, if $q$
contains a clause like “unless ...” and the agent does not recognize
that the clause is relevant. It is important that what is forgotten is
harmless in this way.

In (PT), $S$ knows that $p$ in cases (1), (2), and (3). $S$ knowing that
$p$ in cases (1) and (2) will be uncontentious, and case (3) will still
be knowledge after some analysis. Case (3) is knowledge because
otherwise the standard for knowledge is too high for agents to hold on
to knowledge through time. Somewhat like useful false beliefs, so long
as there continues to exist a “path not taken” at $t_2$ between a
doxastic attitude at $t_2$ by $S$ and the propositional justification
that was doxastic for $S$ at $t_1$, then $S$ has knowledge.

Useful false beliefs and (LFB)
------------------------------

This is how Klein can both permissibly drop his false belief about the
secretary and retain his knowledge about the student, which I call case
(3). Using my account of permissibly dropping a justifying belief, the
analysis is as such: Klein’s belief in $p$, that he has a meeting with
the student on Monday, is true. His belief in $uf$ is valid
justification for $p$, and it doxastically justifies $p$ at $t_1$. In
case (3), Klein loses his belief in $q$ at $t_2$. Through $t_3$, $uf$
continues to propositionally justify $p$ for Klein. Because there is no
condition that could change the justification relationship between $uf$
and $p$, for instance “$uf$ unless the student emails you”, it is
entirely harmless that Klein forget this belief. On top of that, Klein
is dropping a belief in accordance with (LFB), which is the desired
result. This is how it is possible to use Klein’s work in ‘Useful False
Beliefs’ and maintain that (LFB) is valid.
