What are the Problems for Infinitism?
=====================================

Abstract
--------

The purpose of this paper is to resolve the issues raised by Ginet in his “Reply to Klein” in Chapter 5 of “Is Infinitism the Solution to the Regress Problem?” and raise other, still unanswered questions that infinitism raises. First, I will outline the argument for infinitism presented by Klein in his “Infinitism is the Solution to the Regress Problem.” Then, I will outline the problems raised by Ginet in what was the “last word” of the exchange, which is his “Reply to Klein.” Then, I will argue that his reply is not successful in its goals. Finally, I will offer two problems for infinitism that do not depend on accepting any alternative view.

The Argument for Infinitism
---------------------------

Klein has two ways of arguing for infinitism. In the logical space of
the structure of justification, there exists only three possible
components. Justification ends, continues forever, or loops back in over
itself. If Klein can show that it is inconsistent to hold that
justification ends or loops back in on itself, then we have reason for
investigating and accepting infinitism. This is his first strategy.

### The Argument Against the Opposition

Klein argues that neither foundationalism nor coherentism, the former
necessarily warrant-transfer and the latter either warrant-transfer or
warrant-emergent[^1], can solve the regress problem. He does this by
means of a conversation between two agents, representing the viewpoints
of a foundationalist, coherentist, and a doubter.

To represent the doubter, Klein uses the name Doris. In the conversation
regarding foundationalism, the other participant’s name is Fred. In his
charitable way, Klein grants that foundationalism is true and seeks to
find the what foundationalism entails. Fred asserts that $p$. Doris asks
Fred for his reason for believing $p$, to which Fred responds $r_1$. The
next natural question that Doris poses is what are Fred’s reasons for
$r_1$? The response is $r_2$, and this back and forth goes on for some
time. Finally, Fred comes to $b$, which is a foundational belief. Fred
asserts that it is no longer appropriate to ask of $b$ the question
asked of $r_1 \dots r_n$ [^2]. Doris’s next question is much different,
asking of Fred, “I grant that $b$ has autonomous warrant. But what I
want to know is whether autonomously warranted propositions are, in
virtue of that fact, somewhat likely to be true.”

There are only three possible doxastic attitude with regards to a
proposition: assent, dissent, or withhold judgement. Fred has these
three options with regards to Doris’s question about the relationship
between autonomous warrant and truth. Fred’s options:

> 1.  He can *hold* that autonomously warranted propositions are
>     somewhat likely to be true in virtue of the fact that they are
>     autonomously warranted.
>
> 2.  He can *deny* that autonomously warranted propositions are
>     somewhat likely to be true in virtue of the fact that they are
>     autonomously warranted.
>
> 3.  He can *withhold* whether autonomously warranted propositions are
>     somewhat likely to be true in virtue of the fact that they are
>     autonomously warranted.
>

The problem is now clear: Fred has a trilemma where none of options are
tenable. If Fred assents to the that autonomously warranted propositions
are likely to be true in light of there being autonomously warranted,
then, Klein argues, “*the regress has continued.*” Fred now has to
produce his reasons for thinking that any proposition, in this case $b$,
with the property of autonomous warrant, $F$, is likely to be true, and
this continues *ad infinitum*. If Fred sees this and either dissents or
withholds judgment, then his belief set and their justification
relationships are somehow “not likely to be true.” This would solve the
regress but transfer no warrant.

Klein crafts a similar argument for coherentism, where instead of Fred
the foundationalist, there is Carl the coherentist. Carl faces a
trilemma just like Fred’s, where Doris questions Carl about whether a
coherent set of propositions is likely to be true. If Carl dissents or
withholds, then why should we adopt coherent sets of beliefs over
incoherent sets?[^3] If Carl assents, then the regress continues. Thus,
Klein concludes, coherentism cannot be the solution to the regress
problem, as a coherentist cannot increase credibility of propositions.

Thus, because the only two logical possibilities besides infinitism are
inconsistent or arbitrary in practice, we have reason to believe that
infinitism is the solution to the regress problem. Although this assumes
justifiedness is even possible, that the regress does not lead to
skepticism, the scope of that project is too great to do justice in a
piece on infinitism. The responses that Klein gives to the best
objections to skepticism offer some positive reasons for accepting
infinitism.

### The Formulation of the View

Infinitism follows, Klein argues, from the adoption of two principles.
The first is called the Principle of Avoiding Circularity (PAC), and the
second is the Principle of Avoiding Arbitrariness (PAA). PAC asserts
that for any proposition which a person has reason for believing, the
proposition which the person has reasons for should not be in the
reason-ancestry of itself. In other words, when you are forming an
argument that $p$, you may that use $p$ as a premise to prove $p$.
Circular reasoning allows any reasoner to prove everything and its
converse, so it is a bad way of reasoning. Klein thinks this is
uncontentious and moves to PAA. This principle is the strict definition
of infinitism, and so it will be reproduced identically. PAA, as found
in Klein,

> <span>**(PAA)**</span> For all propositions, $x$, if $x$ is warranted
> for a person, $S$, at $t$, then there is some reason, $r_1$, available
> to $S$ for $x$ at $t$; and there is some reason, $r_2$ available to
> $S$ for $r_1$ at $t_1$ etc., and there is no last reason in the
> series.

This principle is not that arbitrariness should be avoided, which like
PAC is uncontentious, but rather it is how Klein formulates infinitism
to not suffer from the arbitrariness which Doris, Fred, and Carl
discovered in Klein’s trilemma. The two terms that Klein gives a certain
analysis for in this principle are “available” and “reason.”
Availability is best described by the example given, where
“$352 + 226 = 578$” is available to all with the appropriate algebraic
notions, but may never be instantiated. Furthermore, the belief will
have infinitely many possible justifying reasons, where, for instance,
“$352 + 227 \neq 578$”, “$352 + 228 \neq 578$”, etc, all of which may or
may not ever be instantiated. His conception of reasons, of the sort in
the previous sentence, is open-ended, where Klein assumes only that
there is a valid account, but offers no argument for any of the accounts
as it is outside the scope of this work. He includes four examples of
possible conceptions, with probabilistic reasoning, a social
epistemology conception, a virtue account, and process reliablism.

This is the formulation of infinitism found in “Infinitism is the
Solution to the Regress Problem.” Klein motivates the view even more by
responding to objections.

Ginet’s “Reply to Klein”
------------------------

The format of the book is such that first, Klein answers “yes” to the
question of whether infinitism is the solution to the regress problem.
Second, Ginet answers “no” to the question of whether infinitism is the
solution to the regress problem. Third, Klein is given an opportunity to
retort. Finally, Ginet is given the last word, responding to Klein’s
retort. This section will outline that last retort. The section of
Ginet’s reply which is relevant is the first, titled “Fred and Doris.”

Ginet takes Klein’s conversational argument and modifies it to elucidate
his foundationalism. Specifically, where Klein left the initial
proposition that Fred asserted and Doris questioned unspecified, Ginet
instantiates it with, “Little Benny has been in the living room with
blue paint on his hands.” Doris then asks for, to use Klein’s label,
$r_1$, to which Fred answers, “There’s a blue smear on the wall.” To
which, keeping with the original form of the conversation, Doris asks
for $r_2$, to which Fred offers,

> “I see a blue smear on a white surface right in front of me.”

Ginet thinks that Fred could justifiably stop giving reasons here, but
on grounds that he is a foundationalist and therefore an epistemologist,
he can offer more. The reason, $r_3$, that Fred believes $r_2$ for, is
the following: “<span>**(C)**</span> My visual experience is as if I see
such a thing and I am aware of no reason to think that my visual
experience might in this case be misleading me.” In typical doubting
Dora style, Doris asks why Fred is reasonable for believing $r_2$ in
circumstance $C$. Ginet writes that the correct response is for Fred to
assert two facts,

> $r_{3a}$ When $C$ obtains, it is reasonable for me to believe that I
> see a blue smear on a white surface.
>
> $r_{3b}$ $C$ does obtain.

In her insatiable reason-seeking, Doris ask again what reasons Fred has
for believing these. This is where Ginet’s response gets interesting,
where the regress stops, and Doris’ questions follow suit. There is no
need premise to infer $r_{3ab}$ from because it is a basic *a priori*
principle constitutive of the concept of justification for belief in a
perceptual proposition like $p$. Furthermore, no reason is need for
$r_{3b}$, because the following is also a basic *a priori* principle
constitutive of the concept of justification:

> $r_4$ When $C$ obtains and one is prompted by that fact to believe
> that $C$ obtains, then that belief is justified.

And so the regress, and Doris’ question, ends.

Reply to Ginet …Again
---------------------

This response to Klein fails, because it does not interface with the
objection that he raises on the same terms with which the objection is
raised. It is a more subtle fleshing out of the foundationalist story,
and it has a level of complexity not found in Klein. But it does not
solve the problem that Fred and Doris’ conversation raises, but it does
make it more difficult to see. It makes it more difficult to see by
instantiating the case one of perceptual knowledge. It fails to solve
Klein’s problem because the regress continues despite Ginet’s claim that
he does not.

The original Fred and Doris conversation keeps the actual propositions
believed entirely opaque and as variables. While this grants a certain
analytic clarity, it is also entirely possible that it is the wrong sort
of abstraction. For this reason, picking a case which obtains, such as a
perceptual belief, is a good way of assuring that that the analysis is
inline with intuition and experiential preconceptions of justification.

In doing the conversion from general analytic approach to specific
example analysis, it is important to maintain all the relationships of
the analysis to interface with the objection on its own terms.
Otherwise, Ginet may have solved some problem or explained some case,
but it is not the one objection found in Klein, which is the one he is
responding to. As such, Klein’s Doris is going to see that Ginet’s Fred
is at least propositionally committed to $r_{3a} \land r_{3b}$. First,
Doris will ask for a reason for believing that $C$ does obtain. Ginet’s
Fred has the latent belief that perceptual beliefs are caused directly
by an external world, and so $r_2$ is the reason to believe $r_{3b}$,
surely. But the reason given for $r_2$ was $r_{3a} \land r_{3b}$, which
means Ginet’s Fred when prompted again by Klein’s Doris, will cite
$r_{3a} \land r_{3b}$ as a reason for $r_2$. The conversation as
formulated by Ginet has Fred committed to circular reasoning if the
conversation continues past the third reason.

Another problem with Ginet’s response is that no proof is given of
$r_4$. Ginet asserts that “When $C$ obtains and one is prompted by that
fact to believe $C$ obtains, then that belief is justified.” This is the
causal theory of knowledge from the perspective of justification. Where
Ginet writes “prompted,” it is synonymous with “caused.” There are a
number of problems with causal theories of knowing, and by inheritence
with causal theories of justification. The family of problems are those
involving deviant causal histories, where some evil neuroscientist
causes true beliefs in a subject because of the truth. Using this
principle to justify foundationalism *a priori* will suffer from
inappropriate perscriptions of justification. Furthermore, to simply
assert that $r_4$ is a basic *a priori* principle constitutive of
justification is not enough. There needs to either be an argument or a
response to every objection and every other view to justify this
principle.

Furthermore, if the foundationalism that Ginet espouses is correct, then
at least one of the doxastic attitude or epistemic commitments that
Ginet’s Fred has is a belief with a foundational property. The most
likely candidate is the $r_{3b}$, the perceptual belief that $C$
obtains, where $C$ is that there is a blue smear on the wall. While
Ginet tries to craft a backdoor to his *a priori* principle from Klein’s
trilemma, $r_{3b}$ is still either arbitrary or non-foundational.

Infinitism is Not the Solution to the Regress Problem …Again
------------------------------------------------------------

The fact that Ginet’s objection does not work does not mean that
infinitism has answered all the necessary questions, however. This work
will raise two criticisms of infinitism. The first criticism will employ
distinctions and terms defined below. The second criticism will mirror
Klein’s conversation-style argument against foundationalism. The
distinctions are between trivial and nontrivial truth, interesting and
uninteresting arguments, and limited and unlimited epistemic agents.
Additionally, the argument will use an inoffensive principle that Klein
himself espouses.

### Definitions

Nontrivial truth is the variety of truth which philosophers and
non-philosophers typically seek. An example of a nontrivial truth claim
would be “All $x$s are $y$s” where X and Y are substituted for nouns
which cannot be themselves. To instantiate such a claim, “All Fords are
good cars.” This claim is nontrivial because the concept of “Ford” does
not fully contain the concept of “good car” and vice versa. Ford Motors
also manufacture clothes, engines, replacement parts, …Furthermore, the
sentence contains “good”, which adds some normative, subjective
evaluation of the cars. This adds to the fact that the claim is
non-trivial, in that the analysand and analysis are not equivalent,
which is all that is necessary and sufficient for non-triviality in this
sense, and there are additional non-necessary true claims within it.
Contrast this with trivial truth, which comes in a number of varieties
as well. If the analysis of some concept contains the analysand, i.e.
the analysis is self-referential, then you have a trivial truth. For
example, the claim that “All $x$s are $x$s” is trivial for all X. To
instantiate such a claim, “All good cars are good cars.” Another quality
of trivial truth is vacuousness, exemplified by tautological claims
like, “All Ford cars in 469 BC were kept in the Parthenon.” This claim
is trivial because the set of cars before the Christian Era is the empty
set, so claims about them will be necessarily true and not descriptive
of any theoretical or actual objects. A quality shared by all the
trivial truths, vacuous or otherwise, is that to understand the concepts
in a trivial truth is to gain no knowledge from the claim.

Interesting arguments are ones which philosophers and non-philosophers
typically seek. A constitutive part of interesting propositions are
interesting arguments are nontrivial truths. But before semantics,
interesting arguments have syntactical properties. An example of such an
interesting argument would be *modus ponens* in its classical
formulation:

$$p$$
$$p \to q$$
$$\therefore q$$

What makes *modus ponens* interesting in the relevant way is that there
are no repeated terms, the argument is irreducible, and the conclusion
is distinct from the the premise. It is possible to add another clause
to the argument and not cause the argument to be invalid or change the
conclusion. Uninteresting arguments, on the other hand, have repeated,
inessential syntactic components. For instance, consider the argument:

$$p$$
$$p \to q$$
$$\lnot q \to \lnot p$$
$$\therefore q$$

This modification does not change the validity of the argument, it is
still truth preserving. But what makes it uninteresting is that the
third clause adds nothing to the argument, it does not allow a reasoner
to conclude anything new or play a necessary role in coming to the
existing conclusion.

There are also semantic conditions on what makes for an interesting
argument. Like in syntax, there interesting arguments contain no
repeated or redundant propositions. For instance, consider the argument:

> All animals are mortal.
>
> All men are mortal.
>
> Socrates is an animal and a man.
>
> $\therefore$ Socrates is mortal.

What makes this argument uninteresting is that it has an inessential and
still unproblematic element. Any reasoner can come to the same
conclusion without either the clause regarding the mortality of animals
or men. Another semantic condition that interesting arguments have is of
not containing any trivial truths, in the sense described above. The
reason that they cannot contain trivial truths is because trivial truths
will never yield a conclusion distinct from themselves. Of course all
sorts of propositions are implied by “All Ford cars in 469 BC were kept
in the Parthenon.” But these conclusions are not unique in the right way
to this claim. Whatever can can be concluded from this claim will be
trivial, and will be able to be concluded from other trivial truths.

There are a number of ways that an epistemic agent can be limited and
unlimited, and some of those ways are not mutually exclusive in the
abstract. For instance, an epistemic agent can be limited or unlimited
with regards to doxastic attitudes. It is possible for God[^4] to
entertain all propositions at once, while human beings are limited to
only a few propositions at any given time.

Human beings are limited epistemic agents. This argument is not a rehash
or rebranding of the finite mind objection to infinitism. There are a
number of ways that an epistemic agent agent can be limited. For
instance, an epistemic agent can be limited with regards to the number
of propositions that can be doxastic at any given time, which is what
the finite mind objection to infinitism is hinged on. But in another
way, an epistemic agent can be limited in the complexity of a compound
of propositions. For instance, consider the statement,

$$\lnot p \land (q \land u \lor v) \to \lnot \lnot r \lor t \land w$$

It is possible for most sufficiently developed human epistemic agents to
accept an argument of this form, with proper inputs. But it may be
difficult to show a less sophisticated epistemic agent, like say a
pre-teen, that with proper inputs this argument warrants assent. This is
how an epistemic agent can be limited in regard to complexity of
compound propositions. Imagine a complex argument with hundreds of
propositions, where both the syntax and semantics are sound and valid.
Such an argument, if understood, warrants assent. But there will be a
limit of human capacity in this regard, both by nature of available
memory and time to assent to each proposition. Thus, there are at least
two ways in which epistemic agents can be limited, one of which is the
same way as agents are limited in the finite mind objection, the other a
limit on the complexity of possible assent.

This work has now outlined enough distinctions to present the first
objection, or more accurately a limit, on infinitism. Infinitism will be
contingent on the nature of the physical world with regard to
interesting arguments. If the physical world is infinitely divisible or
infinitely large, then there exists an infinite numbers of propositions
which can be believed, and thus an infinite number of interesting
arguments which can be crafted. On the other hand, if the physical world
is not at least infinitely divisible or infinitely large, then there
does not exist an unlimited number of propositions, and thus an infinite
number of interesting arguments cannot be crafted.

This is significant because philosophical investigation seeks necessary
truth and epistemological investigation seeks the necessary and
sufficient conditions for knowledge. If it is not the case that there
are an infinite number of interesting arguments, then infinitism may be
true for only uninteresting arguments. While the infinitist may not mind
accepting that the theory requires including convoluted propositions, it
should be taken as a vice. It is a vice of any theory to require
accepting implausible but technically true models.

Weak as this limit is, infinitists can accept the argument and fight
back by pointing out there are an infinite number of interesting
propositions regardless of the size or divisibility of the physical
world. For instance, there are infinite number of reasons to accept that
“$2 + 3 = 5$.” Namely, that two plus three is not any other number but
three, and there are infinite numbers. One can construct cases like this
for clocks and other counting instances. Interestingly enough, the
response can utilize any of the distinctions above to discount these
cases. It is trivially true that there infinite number of reasons that
“$2 + 3 = 5$”. Ginet notes this in his first response to Klein, and his
response is sufficient for discounting this particular rebuttal. Any
generous theorist will also grant that these sorts of chains of infinite
reasons belong in the set of uninteresting arguments, as the only
essential evidence for the belief that “2 + 3 = 5” is itself. Finally,
it is possible to argue back on grounds of human limits, but this would
suffer from the finite mind re-response, and so the reader should rely
on the first two rebuttles given.

Before the final new argument against infinitism is given, the term
“functional equivalence” needs to be defined. Functional equivalence in
the sense used in this work is a property of two theories which make all
of the same prescriptions. For instance, every theory is functional
equivalent to itself, where Newton’s theory of gravitation makes all the
same predictions as Newton’s theory of gravitation. However, Newton’s
theory of gravitation is not functionally equivalent to Einstein’s
theory of relativity; the two theories conflict where the space-time
continuum bends[^5].

Finally, an important virtue of the correct theory of knowledge is that
it can be used by epistemic agents to evaluate themselves. Of course it
is not necessary to have second order knowledge, though perhaps it is
possible, but the theory should be actionable. If a theory makes no
predictions or attributions, or makes only ones which are the same ones
as a inconsistent theory, then it is a bad theory. Klein himself
expresses this,

> I will be arguing that neither account of warrant can provide it
> solution to the regress problem because neither account can be
> employed by it self-conscious practitioner to increase the rational
> credibility of a questioned proposition and, thus, it primary reason
> for adopting either foundationalism or coherentism has been
> eliminated.

This work will make use of this principle, under the following
formulation, entitled “*U*sed by a *S*elf-conscious *P*racticioner
principle:”

> <span>**(USP) **</span> An account of the theory of knowledge should
> be able to be used by a self-conscious practitioner to increase the
> credibility of propositions in a way that is unique from contradicting
> theories.

### The Technically True Objection

Infinitism is trivially true because it is contingent on there being
unlimited epistemic agents and for counting uninteresting arguments as
part of the set of possible beliefs. It is trivially true in the sense
that it is equivalent to claiming of mathematics that “There are an
infinite amount of numbers.” Of course this will need more motivating,
but here is a *prima facie* reason for thinking so. Part of the
infinitist thesis is that there are an infinite amount of potentially
justifiers for any belief, roughly that “There are an infinite amount of
propositions/justifiers.” Just as to understand numbers is to understand
that there are infinitely many, the understand propositions is to
understand that there are infinitely many. The concepts in the both
claims renders unto the reader no cognitive value, because to understand
numbers or propositions is to understand that there are an infinite
amount of them. The reason that to understand propositions is to
understand that there infinitely many of them is because propositions
can be represented symbolically, with variables like $p$, $q$, etc.
These variables can take on information about numbers, in fact
propositional logic is the fruit of mathematics, and so *of course*
there are infinitely many. In this way, to reason from this infinitist
thesis seems *prima facie* to contain a hidden tautology.

Ignoring the issue of contingency on size and divisibility of the
physical world for there existing infinite interesting arguments,
infinitism will still rely on uninteresting arguments for its truth, and
this should be seen as a vice. Philosophy is interested in necessary
truth, and one conception of this is truth in all possible worlds.
Consider the world with only one proposition, say $A$. Let $\times$
represent any standard logical operator in
$\lbrace \lor, \land, \to \rbrace$. With this, the thesis of infinitism
is correct, one can construct infitite propositions with,
$A \times A \times \ldots \times A$. If this world were to have an
epistemic agent capable of believing $A$, the three accounts of the
structure of justification have different stories about this agent’s
state. The foundationalist is forced to say that because $A$ is the only
proposition, it must be the foundational belief. The coherentist is
forced to say that $A$ is justified by $A$, at least on the warrant
transfer view. Why is it a virtue of infinitism that it can respond that
$A$ is justified by the propositional belief that $A\to A$? Which is
then justified by $A \land A \to A$, ad infinitum. This answer is no
better with regards to arbitrariness than the vicious circular reasoning
of warrant transfer coherentism. Foundationalism seems to have the best
way of explaining this possible world, though it needs to explain what
properties foundational beliefs need to have (otherwise the agent could
never come to actually believe the proposition).

In fact, this base case of a possible world is a problem for all
solutions to the regress, especially in light of Klein’s Fred and Doris
argument. In the possible world where there is only one proposition and
an epistemic agent which can believe it, none of the theories can give a
non-arbitrary or non-regressive story about the belief. The coherentist
relies on circular reasoning. The infinitist relies on circular
reasoning with uninteresting arguments. The foundationalist will make a
claim about $A$ necessarily have the foundational property $F$ if $S$
can come to believe it. As Klein pointed out, if this epistemic agent
questions themselves about the believed proposition, say foundationalism
is also a believable proposition in this world, then the regress
continues. This argument for skepticism is not the principle thrust of
this work, but notice that it includes a demonstration of how infinitism
cannot be true.

For all those worlds with limited epistemic agents, like our own,
infinitism is going to be functionally equivalent to justification
emergent coherentism. Imagine some limited epistemic agent who is
listing her epistemic commitments, or perhaps having them ascribed to
her. This agent is going to be limited in some regard, either in the
complexity of the structure of justification she can conceive or in the
time she has to iterate over her belief set. Therefore, she is going to
have to stop at some point, wherever her limit is met. It is
*impossible* for her to go any further with regards to the structure of
her possible justificational states. In this way, she is in a state in
accordance with warrant emergent coherence. Infinitism now inherits the
problems with this view, as it can be functionally equivalent to it for
limited agents, which are the one’s we typically consider in
epistemology.

Now notice that infinitism has violated (USP). When infinitism is
practiced by a self-conscious and limited agent with regards to
interesting arguments, the predictions and attributions of the theory
about the structure of justification are functionally identical to those
predictions and attributions from warrant-emergent coherentism. Klein
shows that this view could not solve the regress problem even if it were
true. If a self-conscious agents practices infinitism, then his view
might as well be coherentism.

Thus, infinitism is trivially true contingent on allowing uninteresting
arguments into the domain of possible belief states and only for
unlimited epistemic agents.

### Non-Arbitrariness and Belief Sets

The implications of Klein’s Fred, Carl, and Doris style of conversation
is much broader than is explored in Klein’s essay. Specifically, the
style is a problem for all theories regarding the structure of
justification, not just foundationalism and coherentism.

Imagine that our favorite doubter, Doris, sits down with Ivan the
infinitist. Ivan asserts some proposition, say $p$. Doris says something
that prompts Ivan to believe that he had better have reasons for $p$.
Ivan, being a practicing infinitist, knows very well that there
infinitely many possible possible justifying propositions for $p$, and
picks one of them for Doris, say $r_1$. Doris knows that Ivan believes
that the credibility of a proposition emerges from its being a member in
a coherent and sufficiently long justification chain, and so notes that
Ivan’s belief set is no $\lbrace p, r_1\rbrace$. Of course, being the
doubter she is, and with no reason to think Ivan, being an infinitist,
has ran out of reasons, asks of him, “Why do you believe $r_1$?” Again,
Ivan being a good infinitist, continues giving reasons, $r_2$, $r_3$,
$r_4, \dots$ and so on. This continues for some time, until Ivan comes
to $r_k$, which is where the justification chain is sufficiently long to
have knowledge. The belief set that Ivan is now committed to is
$\lbrace p, r_1, r_2, \dots, r_k\rbrace$. Ivan knows that he *could*
give another reason for his belief in $p$, but it is no longer necessary
in light of the fact that warrant has been granted to his belief by the
sufficiently long chain.

Doris says to Ivan, “I grant that your belief set $B$ has given $p$
higher credence by being ’warrant-emergent’, but what I want to know is
whether warrant-emergent beliefs sets are, in virtue of that fact,
somewhat likely to contain true propositions.” Ivan is now faced with a
quadlemma:

1.  He can hold that warrant-emergent belief sets are somewhat likely to
    contain true propositions.

2.  He can deny that warrant-emergent belief sets are somewhat likely to
    contain true propositions.

3.  He can withhold that warrant-emergent belief sets are somewhat
    likely to contain true propositions.

4.  He can go back to giving reasons for $p$.

Just like in the cases of Fred and Carl, if Ivan responds with (2) or
(3), then the entire notion that warrant-emergent belief sets confer
justification is inconsistent. If Ivan responds (1), he needs to give an
account of what a warrant-emergent belief set is. The answer, which
Klein gives as a virtue of warrant-emergent coherentism, is coherence.
But then Ivan is faced with the same problem as Carl, where if “coherent
sets are *ipso facto* likely to contain propositions that are true” is
included in the coherent set, then Ivan is faced with the same problems
as warrant-transfer views. If it is not, then Ivan has just added a new
proposition to the coherent set and the regress has continued. If Ivan
responds (4), then infinitism violates USP as it can never be used by a
self-conscious practitioner to increase the credibility of propositions
in a way that is unique from contradicting theories. This is the case
because Doris will continue asking “why” until the stakes have been
raised from knowledge, to certainty, to infallibility, …and the
quadlemma is posed again. (1), (2), and (3) are untenable for
infinitism, so Ivan has to pick (4) again. No agent can raise
credibility of propositions like this because it requires an unlimited
epistemic agent, one which can give reasons infinitely. Furthermore,
there will come a point where Ivan, being a limited agent, can no longer
hold in his mental buffer the belief set he’s listed,
$\lbrace p, r_1, r_2, \dots, r_k, \dots \rbrace$. Which means that Ivan
is left with merely a coherent set of propositions. Doris can now apply
the trilemma offered to Carl to Ivan, and USP is violated in light of
coherentism being a contradicting theory to infinitism. Thus, infinitism
is not the solution to the regress problem.

Conclusion
----------

The structure and content of justification is one of the hardest
projects the study of the theory of knowledge faces. The analysis of
knowledge yield justified true belief, and now the analysis of
justification has yielded the three possibilities: foundationalism,
coherentism, and infinitism. The analysis of infinitism has yielded both
promising and troubling conclusions for knowledge. This work began by
outlining the argument for infinitism, both the arguments against the
two alternatives and the specific formulation of the positive account.
Then, this work moved to outlining a critical response to the account,
and showed that the criticisms were not succesful in demotivating the
view. Then, despite the worry of sending mixed signals, this work
formulated definitions from which one can properly object to infinitism.
These definitions yielded two objections, the Technically True Objection
and a conversation between Doris and Ivan. Infinitism is still the best
solution to the regress problem, but infinitism is not unique from its
alternatives in suffering from the kind of objection that Klein raises
against the opposition.

[^1]: Warrant-transfer views are ones in which “justification juice” is
    passed on from some proposition to another. Warrant-emergent views
    are ones in which the credibility of a given proposition is confered
    by being a member in a set of beliefs with some property, for
    instance coherence.

[^2]: Later, when Doris asks how autonomously warranted propositions are
    somewhat likely to be true, that “Fred went meta first.” This
    statement of Fred’s must be what he was referring to. The
    foundationalist has room to respond by claiming that foundational
    beliefs are simple concepts and latent biases, dispositions,
    attitudes rather than this rigid belief Klein is attributing.
    Furthermore, the foundationalist can say that the confusion is
    arising out of the difference between knowing and be able to assert,
    or akin.

[^3]: The coherentist has *a lot* of room to move here. For instance, a
    response could be that truth is consistent by the principle of
    non-contradiction. Alternatively, Klein may be question begging,
    because of course the coherentist is going to think that coherence
    is going to make a set of beliefs likely to be true, *because that’s
    their thesis*, or because it’s consistent with their other beliefs.
    Issues of question begging and circular reasoning are hard to
    identify with these sorts of qualms. But this is a topic for a
    coherentist and for another work.

[^4]: Please put aside the issue of such a being’s existence or
    nonexistence, the work only uses the qualities which gods have.
    Imagine a world with an omniscient and omnipotent being.

[^5]: Perhaps this is not *quite* right or not subtle enough of an
    understanding, but please accept this on its face as I will not use
    physics in my argument.
