Aristotle, Knowledge, and Perception
====================================

Science, knowledge, proof, perception, demonstration - in the many
thousands of years since Aristotle wrote his *Posterior Analytics*,
there has been much development, both scientific and philosophical,
produced on these matters. Notwithstanding the the many important and
exciting discoveries humankind has learned in this time, Aristotle’s
very old account of scientific knowledge in his *Posterior Analytics*
stubbornly remains as one of the most influential, compelling, and
relevant works in epistemology, philosophy of science, and even
metaphysics. Aristotle’s epistemological program in *Posterior
Analytics* solves the skeptical trilemma in way that is both simple and
difficult to understand. It is simple because it can be expressed in one
word: perception. It is difficult to understand because of the
stipulations on the ways in which perception is a form of knowledge and
what types of knowledge perception is not even a means to. With a full
understanding, however, Aristotle’s account of knowledge and its source
is intellectually satisfying and complete. This paper will seek to make
accessible this epistemological program. Then, with this understanding,
describe and evaluate the account offered by two papers produced in
response to Aristotle. The first is ‘Aristotle’s Rationalism’ by Michael
Frede, in which Frede describes how he believes that Aristotle is more
of a rationalist than the empiricist he is typically described as. The
second is David Bronstein’s work, ‘The Origin and Aim of *Posterior
Analytics* II.19’, in which Bronstein argues that knowledge of first
principles do not come from induction for Aristotle, but rather
perception. This will provide a full understanding of Aristotle’s
epistemological program.

The beginning of all knowledge for Aristotle is what he calls “first
principles.” In this was, all learning and knowledge is derived from
these first principles. So what are first principles (FPs)? They hold
very specific qualities. FPs are *true* in that they are both
necessarily true and could not possibly be otherwise. FPs are *primary*
in that there is no prior truth from which they can be derived from. FPs
are *immediate* in that there is no middle term to explain their
connection (this is a logical point). FPs are *better known* than those
things that we derive from them, meaning they are somehow closer to
agents epistemologically. FPs are *explanatory* of those things which a
rational agent derives from them. Aristotle insists on the necessity for
first principles because without them, one if first to accept one of
three impossible and unacceptable conclusions, which shall be covered
shortly. It is from these that all art, science, and knowledge is
derived, Aristotle believes, but what is that process?

What Aristotle then claims is that all knowledge and teaching follows
from these FPs with these qualities. In the case of inductive arguments,
the teacher proves something universal from particular cases. In the
case of deductive arguments, the teacher proves something assuming what
we presume to grasp (like an FP). Generally speaking, we presuppose that
some information is, and from it we can comprehend another reasoned
fact. When such an argument expresses knowledge and is a scientific
induction, it is known as a *demonstration*. A demonstration is when a
rational agent logically derives a conclusion from premises which are
more basic (in being closer to primary truths and sense-perception the
conclusion). A rational agent comes to know the conclusion by having two
premises and one conclusion. The first premise and the middle premise
share exactly one term or predicate. The conclusion and the middle
premise share exactly one term or predicate, specifically the one not
share with the first premise. In this way, a rational agent moves links
the premise to the middle term, and then the middle term to the
conclusion, moving away from the more basic, more prior truths.

This description of syllogistic logic is inoffensive, but is this not
just coming from saying that there are indemonstrable first principles?
This raises the question, then, of how The question that still has not
been answered by the description is Aristotle’s solution to the
epistemological trilemma. Aristotle addresses this issue, but what,
specifically, *is* the issue? The problem is what every epistemological
theory must escape, and its three choices are:

1.  Circular reasoning, that knowledge is justified based on itself,
    that every theory is support by a theory which is supported by the
    theories it proves.

2.  Infinite regress, that every proof actually be of infinite length.

3.  Complete skepticism, that knowledge is impossible.

Aristotle rejects (1) on grounds that no demonstration can be prior to
and more familiar than itself. Aristotle rejects (2) on grounds that
infinitely long proofs are absurd, assuming that infinitely long proofs
do not exist. Aristotle rejects (3) on grounds that it is inelegant.
Therefore Aristotle’s epistemology has to find a way for agents to grasp
some precepts.

Additionally, demonstration of anything is impossible without beginning
somewhere, and Aristotle solves this problem with *perception*. All
animals have this faculty, but what Aristotle believes is unique about
humans is there ability of *retention*. With this, from perception
arises *memory*. Repeated memories of the same things produces
*experience*. With this experience, a rational agent utilizes inductive
logic to count and generalize individual kinds to make inductive
generalizations of universals. This gives an agent an intuitive grasp of
first principles. It is thus through perception and induction from
specific experiences to general universal that rational agents come to
know first principles, and then from these first principles all other
truths can follow. This is how Aristotle solves the skeptical trilemma.

Having described Aristotle’s epistemological program in a fashion which
draws directly from the original text (namely *Posterior Analytics*) in
an accessible manner, we move to an application and discussion of it
from Michael Frede. In ‘Aristotle’s Rationalism’, Frede argues that
while Aristotle is sometimes referred to as an empiricist, he is more
accurately labelled as a rationalist. He then goes on to specifically
enumerate how Aristotle’s reason plays a role in his epistemological
program.

The reason that Frede’s (and ultimately Bronstein’s) paper is needed is
that Aristotle’s solution to the trilemma could arguable be either
empiricist or rationalist in nature. It’s empiricist in that knowledge
of first principles is a product of data collected from the experience
derived from perception. On the other hand, as Frede points out, the
solution is rationalist in nature in that all demonstrations are done on
first principles using reason alone. The puzzle being why would
Aristotle insist that all we know is derived from reason if he insists
primary truths are the product of perception? Frede points out that it
is not immediately obvious how these are immediately reconcilable.

Frede elucidates this puzzle, but is more interested in the latter
portion of the puzzle as described above. Specifically, Frede explores
those ways which Aristotle uses reason when Aristotle is in the
non-experiential portions of his trilemma solution. Using evidence from
*Metaphysics* and *Posterior Analytics*, Frede shows that Aristotle’s
position is actually that of perception falling short of *true
knowledge*, but does give rise to it in humans. According to Aristotle
and Frede, this is because perception (and by extension experience)
cannot offer true knowledge of universals. However, practically, in the
day to day affairs of a human rational agent, reason is evidently only
useful in specific and highly elevated instances. In practice, from an
Aristotelian perspective, experience is more useful than reason, Frede
argues. The prominent role that reason plays in Aristotle’s
epistemological program, according to Frede, is that an *adequate*
notion is properly related to other true notions. Only through reason
can this be acquired.

Bronstein, in his work ‘The Origin and Aim of *Posterior Analytics*
II.19’, explores the other side of Aristotle’s epistemological program.
Where Frede would answer “induction”, Bronstein is more inclined to say
“perception”, and the paper is him outlining his reason for this. The
first portion of II.19, Bronstein thinks, is setting up perception as
the basis for all knowledge. This is more of empiricist reading, and
Bronstein has strong examples. Namely, this quote,

> And so from perception there arises memory, as we say, and from memory
> (when it occurs often in connection with the same thing) experience;
> for many memories form a single experience. And from experience, or
> [rather] from the entire universal that has come to rest in the soul

The mistake that Bronstein believes his peers to be making is in
thinking that “grasping the universal” and acquiring knowledge of a
first principle are the same thing. While Aristotle is unclear about the
actual process of moving from an experience of universals to a first
principle, it is very clear that there are, for Aristotle steps between
the two. However, Aristotle is clear about what the two can do. For
instance, Bronstein points out that experience is knowledge of
particulars, but it is from this knowledge of particulars that one
access the FPs, and that this is *through reason*.

It is in this way that Bronstein and Frede are consistent while arguing
from different standpoints. Frede is clearly more interested in arguing
for a rationalist reading, and Bronstein an empiricist reading, yet both
come to the conclusion that it is epistemological data gathering that
perception performs, and the moving from particulars to universals that
reason performs. However, Bronstein has the more powerful case. Frede
concludes that Aristotle is a rationalist, while it is clear upon close
reading that while induction plays an important role in moving towards
the FPs, it is ultimately perception, and repeated perception, which
performs the task

In a series of clever moves and clear definitions, Aristotle moves from
the skeptical trilemma to an intuitive, simple account of how it is one
can come to know something. Frede interprets these moves from a very
rationalist approach, primarily exploring those portions where Aristotle
uses reason to induce universals. Bronstein, on the other hand, commits
himself to a more empiricist reading, as Aristotle is very explicit
about *perception* being the knowledge of FPs. It is because of this
explicitness that Bronstein is more successful than Frede, in that he
has the stronger claim and the evidence for it.
