A Truth-Driven Causal Theory <small>by Paul Jones</small>
=========================================================

Introduction
------------

Since the 1963 publication of “Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?”, the
literature of epistemology has been trying to find a solution to Edmund
Gettier’s counterexamples to the standard formulation of the necessary
and sufficient conditions of where a subject $S$ knows that a
proposition $p$. For example, it was five years after Gettier’s paper
when Alvin Goldman proposed, in his 1967 work “A Causal Theory of
Knowing,” a solution grounded in causality and appropriate causal
connections to account for the inadequacy that Gettier pointed out. In a
continuation of this beck-and-call style of publishing, it was nine
years after Goldman’s work in 1967 when Peter Klein responded to Goldman
with the work “Knowledge, Causality, and Defeasibility”, where he
attempts shows that causal theories are still inadequate for
Gettier-type cases, and that the better solution is to use defeasibility
theory to get right what causality gets wrong. While Gettier remains
removed from the solution, either Goldman or Klein is wrong or both are
wrong. Additionally, as if the picture were not grim enough for the
anti-skeptic, a problem for theories of knowing (and perhaps all
theories) is the problem of bootstrapping, explored by Stewart Cohen in
“Basic Knowledge and the Problem of Easy Knowledge.” A causal theory of
knowing, combined with foundationalism, provides the best solution to
Gettier-type cases and the bootstrapping problem. With a rigorous
analysis of how something comes to be known causally from beginning to
end is the best way of seeing how that causal theories are the proper
analysis of knowledge. By explaining the Gettier problem, how Goldman’s
solution works, and why Klein’s objection fails, this rigorous analysis
will come about.

The Gettier Problem
-------------------

This problem begins with the standard analysis of knowledge, where $S$
is said to know $p$ if and only if:

1.  $S$ believes $p$,

2.  $S$ is justified in believing $p$, and

3.  $p$ is true.

This model, hereafter referred to by (JTB), comes to the correct
conclusion for a lot of cases, but perhaps for the not the right reason,
as the reader will see. For instance, when $S$ knows the pythagorean
theorem. Assume that $S$ comes to understand the symbols and meaning of
the proof of the pythagorean theorem. The valid and sound proof of the
pythagorean theorem acts as *justification* for $S$’s *belief* in the
theorem. Assuming this theorem is *true*, this (JTB) theory of knowledge
concludes that $S$ knows the pythagorean theorem. This was thought to be
perfectly inoffensive, until ...

If there exists one case in a possible world where all of the necessary
and sufficient conditions of (JTB) are met for $S$ knowing $p$ and yet
$S$ does not know, then the model is flawed. Edmund Gettier imagines
such a world where Smith believes that “Jones owns a Ford,” call this
proposition (q). Furthermore, Smith has very strong evidence for the
belief in (q), having seen Jones drive a Ford very often. Smith has
another friend, Brown, whose whereabouts Smith is entirely unaware.
Smith notices that by the rules of logic, the proposition “Jones owns a
Ford or Brown is in Barcelona”, called (p), is true given that (q). As
it turns out, it is not the case that (q) but it happens to be the case
that Brown is in Barcelona. This means that (p) is true, that Smith
believes (p), and that Smith is justified (p), having seen Jones with a
Ford plenty of times. Yet, intuition or some other faculty leads Gettier
to think that Smith does not know that (p), despite having a justified
true belief. Therefore, it is inescapable that something is lacking with
the theory.

Goldman’s Causal Solution
-------------------------

Alvin Goldman in 1967[^1] noticed that what makes (p) true is the fact
that Brown is actually in Barcelona. More importantly, the fact that (p)
is true is not what causes Smith to believe that (p), Smith randomly or
luckily comes to accept a (p) on the basis of a justified falsehood.
Specifically, Goldman notes that “there is no causal connection between
the fact that Brown is in Barcelona and Smith’s believing (p).” This is
what Goldman thinks is faulty with Gettier cases; Goldman believes that
the Gettier believer fails because the causal connection is lacking.
Formally, $S$ is said to know that $p$ if and only if:

1.  $S$ believes $p$,

2.  $S$ is justified in believing $p$,

3.  $p$ is true, and

4.  $S$’s belief that $p$ is appropriately causally related to $p$.

This theory of knowledge will be hereafter called (JTB + ACC), and the
word “appropriately” will be explored later.

There are a number of problems for this theory, a few types of knowledge
that it may seem to be inhospitable to. Goldman himself formulates two
problems for a causal theory of knowing. There are examples that can be
instantiated with “veritable delusions,” where $S$ is being fed truths
about reality by some boring mad scientist. It is a problem because
$S$’s belief in $p$ is causally related to $p$’s truth $S$ appears to be
justified in believing, and yet $S$ still does not seem to know. Another
problem Goldman conceives himself is one where deviant causal chains are
established. For instance, say the same bizarre neuroscientist directly
injects knowledge about weather on Mars to his friend, unbeknownst to
the friend. It is a problem because $S$’s belief in $p$ is causally
related to $p$’s truth, at least the neuroscientist is justified in
believing, and yet $S$ still does not seem to know.

Klein’s Problem with Causality
------------------------------

Peter Klein in his 1976 work, “Knowledge, Causality, and Defeasibility,”
attempts to craft an irrecoverable objection to causal theories of
knowing. In its place, Klein offers defeasibility theory. Defeasibility
theories are irrelevant to this work’s topic, and their compatibility
with causal theories is a topic to be explored at a later date. Klein
claims that it is impossible for causal theories to account for
knowledge of generalities, knowledge of mathematical or logical truths,
or knowledge of deontic truths by causal chains (at least not without
non-natural chains).

The problem that causal theories have with knowledge of generalities is
that it seems as thought we know general statements, like “All men are
mortal” or “Someone in the office owns a Ford.” Yet what does the causal
chain for this knowledge look like? Goldman crafts a procedure by which
general truth can be known, but Klein effectively uses *reductio ad
absurdum* to dismiss it. Additionally, with mathematical and logical
truths that $S$ comes to know, it is hard to find a causal chain between
a field as abstract as mathematics or logic and $S$’s justified belief,
assuming that math and logic are true. And yet $S$ surely knows about
mathematics and logic. Klein reinforces the problem of deviant causal
chains, specifically of the causally over or under deterministic cases.
By using the case of Tom and John Grabit and $S$’s justified true belief
appropriately caused by Tom’s stealing of a book to $S$’s causally
over-determining that John stole the book, Klein demotivates acceptance
of causal theories.

Goldman has mechanisms by which he thought he accounted for these types
of knowledge, and Peter Klein effectively vanquishes them. Yet this does
not mean that causal theories are without hope, it could be the case
that Goldman’s account of how events are appropriately causally related
need more.

An Truth-Driven Causal Theory
-----------------------------

With a few metaphysical principles are a new model, a causal theory of
knowing can survive Klein’s criticism. Beginning with a chart:

      Truth +----------------------------------------------+ 
        |   |               +----------------------------+ |       
        |   |          (a)  |         (b)   +----------+ | |  (c)
        +-----Events ------>| Sense ------> | Thoughts |-----------+
        |   |               | perception    +----------+ | |       |
        |   |               +----------------------------+ |       |
        |   +----------------------------------------------+       |
        |                                                          |
        +----------------------------------------------------------+

And now for some metaphysical premises and definitions:

1.  There is truth.

2.  There are only two types of truth, those physical and those not.

3.  Everything natural is in the set of events, which are all physical
    truths.

4.  Every nonnatural truth can be posited propositionally.

5.  Sense perceptions and thoughts are natural and contained in the set
    of events.

6.  Sense perceptions are events which are conditional on other events.

7.  Sense perception causally detects some of the events in the set of
    all events.

8.  Thoughts are mental events, which are conditional on sense
    perceptions.

9.  Propositional truths can have physical manifestations.

These will be taken as true premises.

What this chart is describing is how we come to causally know something.
Because there is truth and truth can be natural events, truth can
trigger sense perception to occur. This is how direct acquaintance with
brute facts occurs, by the trickling of truth from the world outside of
a perceiver onto the sense-receivers, where rods and cones are activated
or deactivated and hammers and anvils are hit. The process of (b) is one
in which sense events are aggregated and synthesized by our mind,
filtering through the portions of the brain which process sense-data and
the pre-existing intuitions.

The chart represents how everything begins with truth, and how truth can
come to be manifested as events. These events trigger by means of (a)
conditional events, one type of which is the sense perceptions of
conscious beings. Senses can be conditionally triggered competently and
incompetently, and can also be triggered or not triggered both with or
without an accompanying event. Senses are competently triggered when
knowledge has the potential to be formed, as the knowledge which could
be formed is part of a series of events which are connected in to truth
in a causal way. Senses are incompetently triggered when a true event
occurs and a respective sense perception happens, but they are in no way
linked together. Because sense perceptions are events, they are true
insofar as they happen and are in the natural world, but they are
incompetent in that there exists no accompanying non-perceptual event
which are manifest the truth that would cause them to happen. Sense
perception can occur independent of external events, that is, without an
event which causes it. These sense perceptions are events like any
other, but they could manifest no competence or lead to knowledge, these
perceptions are flawed. Knowledge is possible, but not necessary, when
sense perception is competently triggered by events which are one degree
away from truth. To be “one degree away from truth” means to be brute
facts that are accessible by direct acquaintance[^2].

Moving on to the process of (b), this is where atomic sense data, a
subset of all possible metadata triggered by events, comes to be
filtered, processed, and understood by the lower faculties of the human
brain. The raw sense data is taken in on the rods and cones, the hammers
and anvils, and made consumable by the higher faculties. This is where
seemings and intuitions arise, they exist in (b). These seemings and
intuitions can remain inert here, or go on by means of (b) to conscious
or unconscious thought, roughly equivalent to mental states and doxastic
attitudes. To be as rigorous as possible, the process of (b) is where
events are translated from sense-data into the language of thought[^3].
When seemings and intuitions go on to form conscious thoughts is when
knowledge is possible, specifically when the seemings and intuitions
made accessible to the higher order cognitive processes are competently
manifested in a propositional thought. Notice that this is an event, and
events can be sensed. This is what “self-awareness” is about, and this
is how generalities come to be known. Specific instances of the
non-physical truth can come to be known and fed back into a perceptual
process.

Explanatory Power of Truth-Driven Causality
-------------------------------------------

The necessary and sufficient conditions of knowing can be effectively
modeled by this account by saying that a subject $S$ knows that $p$ if
and only if $S$’s belief that $p$ began with truth and ended with a
thought. Furthermore, the transitions named (a), (b), and (c) can be
thought of as conjunctions, and $S$’s belief that $p$ is only knowledge
if the whole conjunction is true (or, alternatively, that none of the
“propositions” are false). The whole “conjunction” is true when it
begins with truth and all transitions are manifestations of $S$’s
competence (that is, causally related to the truth).

This explains Gettier cases because $S$ is directly acquainted with the
sense-data that is used to form the thought that “Jones owns a Ford.”
From this, Jones incompetently feeds that proposition through (c) and to
the thought that “Jones owns a Ford or Brown is in Barcelona.” This is
not causally connected to truth and it is not a competent manifestation
of the transitions. The causal chain is “false” as a conjunction.

But this was already explained by Goldman, how does this model account
for knowledge of generalities, mathematical, and logical truths? These
truths are non-physical truths that can be manifested physically. For
instance, having two apples in one hand and having two apples in the
other hand is a physical instantiation of the mathematical truths that
$2 + 2 = 4$. This manifestation is enough for $S$ to come to believe a
mathematical truth in a causal way. $S$ takes this specific instance and
feeds it back into the process by means of (c), noticing it as an event
with his sense perception, specifically his perception of self. $S$ then
traces the mathematical truth from the physical manifestation
competently.

Furthermore, this is a solution for bootstrapping because it
inoffensively posits that there is truth which manifest in true events
and that our perceptions can access at least one of those true events.
If that is granted, the competent perception of the true event can lead
to an appropriately caused thought, which can be fed back into the
process to know more.

Conclusion
----------

This is an initial gloss at trying to solve the bootstrapping problem
and rekindle the causal theory of knowing. It is motivated by the fact
that on some level, it is inevitable that coming to know something is
causal, what is interesting is how that causation can be appropriate and
what knowledge is caused by. There is much that is imprecise and perhaps
some sloppiness, but with enough reflection, I hope that this first
attempt at synthetic philosophy can lead to a necessarily true theory of
knowing.[^4]

Footnotes
---------

[^1]: It is popular to refer to this “version of Goldman” as “Goldman
    1967,” this work will simply use the his name.

[^2]: There are other examples of this. For instance, Aristotle was
    referring to these kinds of truths with what he called “first
    principles” or “FPs.” My reading of Aristotle is the following:

FPs are true in that they are both necessarily true and could not
possibly be otherwise. FPs are primary in that there is no prior
truth from which they can be derived from. FPs are immediate in that
there is no middle term to explain their connection (this is a
logical point). FPs are better known than those things that we
derive from them, meaning they are somehow closer to agents
epistemologically. FPs are explanatory of those things which a
rational agent derives from them.

[^3]: I do not mean the more trendy version proposed by Fodor, but the
    more antiquated version proposed by Leibniz in 1679’s “Of an Oragnum
    or Ars Magna of Thinking.”

[^4]: And I give special thanks to Amos Schorr, Matthew Menchaca, and
    Kurt Sylvan’s Summer 2013 Theory of Knowledge course for inspiring
    me to attempt synthetic philosophy.
    
References
----------

1.  Goldman, A. I. (1967). *A causal theory of knowing*. The Journal of Philosophy.
2.  Klein, P. D. (1976). *Knowledge, causality, and defeasibility*. The Journal of Philosophy. 
3.  Sylvan, K. (Summer 2013). *Theory of knowledge*. Rutgers University Lecture.
