Peerage, Disagreement, and Resolution
=====================================

Introduction
------------

Presented with the same evidence, can multiple people disagree about the
correct attitude to take regarding a proposition? Moreover, if these
people can and *do* disagree, what is it that rationality prescribes as
the next step? Does one forfeit to agnosticism? Do you
“split-the-difference” of the two views, where if one person believes
and the other conscientiously suspends judgement, both should adopt the
attitude of “believing 75%”? Or do you stand your ground, remaining as
confident as ever in having *the right* attitude to take given the
evidence?

The purpose of this paper is to answer the question of what is the
rational “next step” in peer disagreement. First, I will explain key
notions in understand what is problematic in peer disagreement, giving
context and explanation. Then, I will set the stage for a solution to
peer disagreement, both defining the problem and exploring proposed
solutions. Finally, I will give an account of peer disagreement, drawing
from my key notions and set stage as motivation and test my account by
seeing what rationality prescribes in each permutation of peer
disagreement.

Key Notions
-----------

### General peers vs. Epistemic peers

> Never to ask for the meaning of a word in isolation, but only in the
> context of a proposition. — Gottlob Frege, *Introduction to The
> Foundations of Arithmetic*

The term “peer” is often used to describe one’s academic, professional,
or other institutional cohorts, where any two undergraduates are peers,
any two of a company’s middle-managers are peers, for instance. This
everyday use is logically weaker than the philosophical use, where
undergraduates and middle-managers are *general peers*. This concept of
general peerage requires the subject of roughly equal intellect,
sophistication, and breadth of knowledge, because severe gaps would
result in a possible peer not making it into university,
middle-management, or other institutions which grant this sort of
peerage. This general peerage can be thought of as a relation whose
inputs are two people.

The use of “peer” with regards to peer disagreement is more specific,
where the two subjects that are *epistemic peers*. Two subjects are
epistemic peers (that is, satisfy the epistemic peer function) *with
respect to* a domain $D$ just in case $S_1$ and $S_2$ are equally
rational, knowledgeable, intelligent, and evidentially informed about
matters pertaining to $D$. This can be represented as a relation which
takes two subjects ($S_1$ and $S_2$) and a domain ($D$) as input. A
proposition is said to be in a domain, where, for instance, “Apple, Inc.
sold more smartphones in 2013 than they have in any other year.” would
be included in the domain of “American technology companies post-2000”
and presumably many others. A domain can be thought of as a set of
propositions.

Notice that there is no necessary relationship between general peerage
and epistemic peerage, where an undergraduate can be an epistemic peer
with a middle-manager with regards to a domain. However, general peerage
might serve as a piece of evidence for two subjects satisfying the
conditions of epistemic peerage. Alternatively, general peerage might be
thought of in terms of two subjects satisfying epistemic peerage for
many domains. Cases of peer disagreement often include general peerage,
but the relevant feature is epistemic peerage with regards to the same
domain. Epistemic peers can reasonably disagree, as opposed to
unjustified or confused disagreement. Furthermore, each agents
cognizance of their own peer relation is significant to rationality, as
we shall see.

### Peer inferiority and superiority

An important feature of subjects that do not satisfy either of the peer
relations is that this implies that one is superior to the other, who is
inferior. For instance, an undergraduate and a professor do not satisfy
the general peer relation, and this is because the undergraduate is the
general peerage inferior to the professor. To see this, consider both
the everyday use of the word “peer” and that there are *likely* many
domains that a professor is the superior to the undergraduate.

Imagine that the professor’s area of research is quantum physics who
thinks nearly exclusively about her research and little else.
Conversely, the undergraduate is a remarkably well-informed political
junkie, always staying up to date on the latest professional analysis of
political happenings. In the domain of what is the best course of action
for a political player in a complicated geo-political negotiation, the
undergraduate and the professor to not satisfy the epistemic peer
relation, as the undergraduate is the epistemic peerage superior to the
professor.

*Prima facie*, if the professor and the undergraduate disagree about
quantum physics, their not satisfying the general peerage relation (that
is that the professor is the general peerage superior to the
undergraduate) is reason to discount the view of the undergraduate.
Notice that the attitude that the professor takes towards the
undergraduate’s peer status can affect what is rational to do.
Similarly, if the undergraduate and the professor disagree about
geopolitical affairs, their not satisfying the epistemic peerage
relation (that is that the undergraduate is the epistemic peerage
superior with regards to the domain of geopolitical affairs) is reason
to discount the view of the professor. In this case, if the professor
used the fact of the undergraduates not being general peers as evidence
for not being epistemic peers as a way to choose her rational next step,
she would be making a mistake.

### Objective vs. Subjective

> Always to separate sharply the psychological from the logical, the
> subjective from the objective. — Gottlob Frege, *Introduction to The
> Foundations of Arithmetic*

There are two parts to any solution to peer disagreement, as the problem
is multifarious. There is the objective, theoretical, third-person,
logical, or external component, where the philosopher has access to all
the relevant states-of-affairs in a way that any actual agent does not.
The question is: Which view solves peer disagreement? These will be
introduced later. Conversely, there is the subjective, applied,
first-person, psychological, or internal component, where actual agents
face the problem of peer disagreement quite often. The question is: What
is the rational next step for agents when a case of peer disagreement is
encountered? The two answers will be closely related, but the fact that
theorists have hypothetical access to state-of-affairs and agents have
only their internal states will inform what is possible for both.

### Uniqueness and Fallibilism

There are at least two features implicit to the the problem of peer
disagreement that make it even possible, and they are as follows.
Fallibilism about justification is the idea that a belief can be
justified even if it is false. It is important to peer disagreement
because if fallibilism is false, then the problem in peer disagreement
disappears. This is because the two agents need to be justified in
different attitudes towards the same proposition to have reasonable
disagreement as opposed to one agent simply holding the wrong attitude
and the other holding the right one (alternatively, both wrong and
different). On the other hand, the uniqueness thesis holds that for any
proposition *and* body of evidence, there is exactly one attitude that
is reasonable to take towards the proposition. If two equally rational
agents are equally informed of a body of evidence and the claim it
supposedly supports, they should come to the same attitude with regards
to the claim (even if it is the attitude does not correspond correctly
with truth).

Setting the Stage
-----------------

Armed with the relevant notions, this work now turns to a case of peer
disagreement. This work will begin by giving an example from Goldman
(forthcoming), and then turn to the three logical possible theoretical
responses to the problem.

### The Liar Politician

Two subjects have known one another for some time, and have even taken
some classes together. In this time, they develop a high regard for one
another’s intellect, sophistication, and breadth of knowledge. There has
been recently been a highly controversial news items where a politician
is alleged to have told a lie. One of the two believes that the
politician *did* tell a lie, while the other believes that the
politician *did not* tell a lie. As it turns out, both have reviewed the
same evidence about the affair, having read the same news items and
watched the same television programs. Both are epistemic peers and
regard one another as such, both equally as informed and equally as good
at forming well-reasoned beliefs. Nevertheless, the two disagree about
the politician. When the two learn of this, what’s the most rational
next step? Should either of them change their view? Or should they stand
their ground? Should they retreat to total suspension?

### Concilliationism

Conciliationism is the view that the rational response to cases of peer
disagreement is to suspend judgement about the contested proposition, to
retreat to agnosticism about the case. The strength of the view is that
it captures the uncertainty one feels when one encounters very strong
and justified peer disagreement. The uniqueness thesis means that *at
least one* of the two agents holds the wrong view. Furthermore, in the
case of true epistemic peers, neither has a privileged or distinct hold
on any evidence or reasoning skills. The weaknesses, however, are that
it requires us to throw out what evidence we *do* have on first
encounter with disagreement. On many topics, including philosophy, this
would lead to widespread skepticism, as there is much disagreement.
Furthermore, the view is self-contradicting, as when the instantiated
peer disagreement case is about the solution to peer disagreement, if
one agent holds that concilliationism is true and another does not, the
view demands agnosticism. The view captures an intuition about peer
disagreement, but it also fails in important ways. It cannot be the
solution to *all* cases of peer disagreement.

### Steadfastness

Steadfastness is the view that the rational response to cases of peer
disagreement is to retain one’s initial belief. The strength of the view
is that it captures the fact that despite what any other might believe,
one’s own opinion still somehow seems privileged in light that one has
immediate access to the seemingly valid justification for your attitude.
Steadfastness would be a very satisfying answer to a case of peer
disagreement that had one small but substantial modification: one
disagreer comes to see that the other is unjustified. The weakness of
the view is that it makes epistemological progress seem impossible if
dogmatically held, as no one would ever come to change their attitude in
light of social evidence.

### Equal Weight

The equal weight view holds that in cases of peer disagreement, one
should give equal weight to the attitude of a peer and to one’s own
attitude. Where conciliation demands agnosticism and steadfastness
demands no change, the equal weight view prescribes that agents “split
the difference” between the two doxastic attitudes or credences. For
instance, if $S_1$ had a credence of $1.0$ towards $p$, that is total
belief, and $S_2$ had a credence of $0.0$ towards $p$, that is total
disbelief (credence $1.0$ towards $\lnot p$), then their new credence
towards $p$ should be $0.5$. The strength of the view is that if two
people who consider one another’s epistemic integrity to be equal learn
that they have different attitudes towards $p$, especially in cases of
total difference, they should be much like sure that they hold the
uniquely right attitude given the evidence. The weakness of the view is
that one’s own evidence and judgment is very cognitively available and
seems valid, regardless of what others may hold.

Characterization
----------------

Armed now with a case of peer disagreement, this work will offer a
symbolic characterization which will be used in the critique of the
problem and suggestion for the solution.

### Strong Peer Disagreement

As presented in Goldman (forthcoming), the liar politician case has the
following relevant features:

1.  $J_{S_{1}} A_1(p)$

2.  $J_{S_{2}} A_2(p)$

3.  $A_1(p) \neq A_2(p)$

4.  $p \in D$

5.  $P_D(S_1, S_2)$

6.  $J_{S_1} A_B(P_D(S_1, S_2))$

7.  $J_{S_2} A_B(P_D(S_1, S_2))$

The symbol $J_S(A(p))$ means “$J$ustified is $S$ in attitude $A$ towards
proposition $p$.” The instantiations $S_1$ and $S_2$ are Goldman’s two
protagonists. The symbol $P_D(S_1, S_2)$ is the epistemic peer relation,
though it so happens the case features general peers as well. The symbol
$p \in D$ means “The proposition $p$ is in domain $D$”, which is “the
politician lied” in the domain of news, modern politics, current
affairs, etc. This paper uses the notation $A(p)$ to represent a
doxastic attitude $A$ towards the proposition $p$. The two attitudes
$A_1$ and $A_2$ are belief and belief-to-the-contrary in Goldman’s liar
politician. Peer disagreement is often characterized as belief
vs. disbelief. This is unwise because suspension of judgement, even
latent, *is* a doxastic attitude and it is just not obvious that the
belief vs. disbelief case of peer disagreement has the same solution as
the belief/disbelief vs. suspension of judgement case. Furthermore, for
*any* two distinct attitudes on the continuum there is a problem of peer
disagreement. The symbol $J_{S_1} A_B(P_D(S_1, S_2))$ means “$J$ustified
is $S_1$ in the $A$ttitude of $B$elief towards the $P$eer relation of
$S_1$ and $S_2$ towards the $D$omain.”

### Unjustified Peer Disagreement

A permutation which will prove useful in showing what is the problematic
feature of peer disagreement is as follows. The conditions are all the
same as strong peer disagreement except for the fact that one of the
peers is actually unjustified. Of course the either peer might not
realize this, and yet the unjustified peer still holds the attitude. The
peer could either have no justification or bad justification.

### Unaware Peer Disagreement

Another permutation on peer disagreement that will do the same as the
previous one is as follows. The conditions are all the same as strong
peer disagreement except that one of the peers is not justified in
believing the peer relation. Specifically, the peer has not formed
belief, suspension, or disbelief about being an epistemic peer with the
other with regard to the domain.

Test the Account
----------------

### Objective Prescriptions in Easy Cases

Before entering into a critique of strong peer disagreement, consider
the easy targets of unaware peer disagreement and unjustified peer
disagreement. If it became clear to all those disagreeing that an
attitude was unjustified for one of the agents, then the unjustified
peer should, if being rational, conciliate to the justified view the
other agents holds. If one party is unjustified in a case of peer
disagreement, then steadfastness is required of the justified
participant. On the other hand, if one party has no reason to believe or
disbelieve that another is an epistemic peer with regards to the domain
of the contested proposition, then until that agent can confirm or
discount that agent’s epistemic peerage, she should retreat to
agnosticism with regards to the proposition. It could be the case that
this person is an epistemic superior or an epistemic inferior, and until
some evidence is collected, preemptive agnosticism is the rational move.

### Psychological Consequences for Easy Cases

When presented with a case of disagreement in the real world, then, two
questions can make the rational next step clear:

1.  Is the other person my epistemic peer?

2.  Is the other person justified in their attitude?

Until the first question is answered, an agent should conciliate, as it
could be the case that this person is a superior, that is has better
evidence. If the answer to the first question is “yes” and the second
answer is “no”, then the agent should remain steadfast, as they have the
justified attitude. If they answer to both questions is “yes”, then it
is a case of strong peer disagreement, which this work now turns to.

### Critique of Strong Peer Disagreement

The strong variety of peer disagreement, while theoretically
representable and easily elucidated, is plausibly impossible as
presented. Goldman writes that, “[The two subjects] have each read
everything in the media and on the Internet about the issue. So [they]
are epistemic peers and regard one another as such.” While it is clear
that the two subjects are indisputably general peers, having taken
classes together and having justifiably equal reasoning powers, the case
seems to assert the impossible: two people being presented with exactly
the same evidence and having exactly the same reasoning processes. The
probability of the case obtaining is unlikely in light of the sheer
volume of evidence with regards to affairs like politicians lying.
Furthermore, two people may regard justifiably one another as epistemic
peers, but that is logically much weaker than two people actually being
epistemic peers. But even charitably, in a controlled environment where
two general peers are presented with the same evidence in the same order
and in the same manner, how is it that any two individuals could really
and truly have all the same conceptual representations and evidential
weights within them? Experience entirely unrelated to the epistemic
issue at hand is going to affect how different agents weight different
evidence. Furthermore, the psychological discussion of heuristics and
biases show ordering effects, self-serving biases, and other
non-relevant factors can influence epistemic decisions. To apply this,
the two subjects in the liar politician case, even granting that they
are general peers and epistemic peers, it is possible that one has a
better grasp of statistic than the other, and this is what sways the
decision one way or the other. The reason that this is possible granting
both general peerage and epistemic peerage is that both would still
*possess* the evidence of the given probability, but it simply *means
more* to one agent than the other. The concept and conditions of
epistemic peerage are not clear enough for there to be an answer to the
problem so formulated.

The other problem with the problem of peer disagreement is the ambiguity
of domains. Consider again the professor who is an expert in quantum
physics and considers little but her research. Instead her peer is not
an undergraduate, but another professor who works in physics as well.
This professor is an expert in physics more generally. What this means
is that this general expert is peers with the quantum expert with
regards to the domain of quantum physics, but is the epistemic superior
of the quantum expert with regards to domain of physics generally (which
includes Newtonian models, special relativity, ...). If these two people
disagree about an proposition in the domain of quantum physics, there is
reason to believe that the general expert’s attitude might be the one
the quantum expert should adopt, or perhaps that the credential movement
should be skewed towards the general expert’s attitude. This is so
because even though the general expert and the quantum expert satisfy
both the general peer relation and the epistemic peer relation with
regards to quantum physics, the general expert will have a broader,
richer, and more holistic understanding of the domain of quantum physics
in light of it being contained within the field of physics. To apply
this to the liar politician case, simply imagine that the two subjects
still have “a high regard for one another’s intellect, sophistication,
and breadth of knowledge” in light of taking classes together, still
“have each read everything in the media and on the Internet about the
issue”, but one is an academic political theorist. This means that the
political theorist and the laymen still are epistemic peers with regards
to the domain of the lying politician, yet the political theorist’s
credence about the lying politician should be more valuable in light of
the more general understanding of politics (a domain the proposition is
also in). The problem, as it is formulated, suffers from not
sufficiently defining what it is to be a peer with regards to a domain.

The only subjects which actually (that is, in the world) satisfy the
epistemic peer relation in the way that the peer disagreement problem
needs is any given agent with himself. Should a subject somehow form two
attitudes with regards to a proposition on the same evidence, that is
that the subject has no more evidence for one attitude than another,
then equal weight should be given to both attitudes. The attack on the
concept of epistemic peerage and peerage with regards to a domain limits
the satisfaction of the relation to only the same individual, and if
that individual forms two attitudes (perhaps conditional on some unknown
fact), the individual should give equal weight to both.

### Psychological Consequences of the Critique

What the theoretical critique motivates with regards to the
psychological next step in peer disagreement is that one, after
investigating whether the other is a peer and the other is justified and
being satisfied, should weight the attitude of the other as though it
were their own. If upon close investigation of another epistemic
relationship with another, it is unclear that any is better or worse
than the other, and that the evidence possessed and evidential chain is
identical, then the two agents are indiscernibly equal. This is a good
result because it does not lead to skepticism in fields where there is
much disagreement, and it does not require throwing out any evidence.

Conclusion
----------

This work has attempted to achieve two goals: 1. To identify what
exactly is problematic in cases of peer disagreement and 2. Prescribe
rational “next steps” for those that actually encounter peer
disagreement. To do this, this paper first elucidated the key notions
involved in peer disagreement. Then, this paper presented an actual
cases and some permutations. Finally, this paper objectively critiqued
the problem as it is described and offered psychological prescriptions
based on this critique.
