---
title: 
  long: What are the Problems for Infinitism?
  short: Problems for Infinitism
affiliation: Rutgers University
professor: Professor Peter Klein
class: Senior Honors Thesis
author: 
  first: Paul
  last: Jones
---

Introduction
------------

The purpose of this essay is to: (1) interpret infinitism and its
objections, (2) to defend infinitism from those objections, and (3) to
identify a new response which doesn't suffer from the same problems as
those objections. First, this work will interpret infinitism and Peter
Klein's Interrogation Argument. Specifically, as it is found in "Human
Knowledge and the Infinite Regress of Reasons" and "Infinitism is the
Solution to the Regress Problem." Second, this work will interpret and
respond to objections to the arguments found in those works.
Specifically, the objections considered come from Carl Ginet's
"Infinitism is not the Solution to (RP)" and Michael Bergmann's "Is
Klein an infinitist about doxastic justification?". Finally, this work
will raise an objection to the Interrogation Argument and examine how
this objection fits into the rest of the dialogue. Specifically, there
may be meta-epistemological priors at the heart of the disagreement
presented, and that there is reason to disagree.

Interpreting Infinitism
-----------------------

My approach to interpreting infinitism will be to first set up the
problem it is taken to solve, followed by an identification of key
notions and principles, and conclude with Klein's argument for it.

### The Regress Problem

Infinitism is an answer to the epistemological puzzle known as *The
Regress Problem*. To get an understanding of what that is, take any
belief of your own. Ask yourself, what reason do you have for believing
this? And continue to do so with every subsequent justifying belief. The
Regress Problem asks, what will be the structure of those responses?
Especially, what is the right structure? More precisely, how do we
become justified in believing anything, if at all? The way that Klein
formulates this question in his chapter of *Contemporary Debates in
Epistemology* is like so,

> (RP) "Which type of series of reasons and the account of
> [justification] associated with it can increase the credibility of a
> non-evident proposition?"[^1]

\noindent There are four possibilities: The series of reasons that can
increase the credibility of a non-evident proposition ...

1.  Will have a *foundational* reason;
2.  Will be a *coherent* set of reasons;
3.  Will be *infinitely* long;
4.  Does not exist, so we should be *skeptical*.

\noindent The argument pattern for many of these positions is
*eliminative* in that a view is endorsed after the arguer eliminates all
other options and posits that justification is possible. Therefore,
because it is possible and there is only one tenable view, it must that
view. Klein argues this way, showing that neither a foundational
approach nor a coherentist approach can solve (RP), and leaving
skepticism for discussion elsewhere [@kleinginet2014, 2428].

### Doxastic vs. Propositional Justification

An important distinction to make in giving a solution to The Regress
Problem is between, roughly, what it takes for a *proposition* to be
justified and what it takes for a *doxastic attitude* to be justified.
For instance, after considering the sentence "Santa Clause does not
exist.", you will be doxastically justified in believing the proposition
that the sentence expresses because you, hopefully, have good epistemic
grounds for the attitude you are taking. But before you considered it,
there was *some sense* in which you had the epistemic prerequisites,
that is, you were already *propositionally* justified, even if you did
not hold any occurrent doxastic attitude at that time. To be more
precise, consider these Hempel-style variables. (RP) is about the state:

> $S$ knows that $p$.

\noindent Knowledge may or may not have sufficient conditions, but there
is some stronger agreement amongst mainstream epistemologists that there
are at least necessary conditions:[^2]

> $S$ knows that $p$ $\to$ $S$ is justified in believing the truth that
> $p$.

\noindent The distinction lies in the the important ambiguity that
exists in the terms "believing" and "justified." If we say that "$S$ is
justified in believing $p$," it could mean that either:

1.  If $S$ were to believe $p$, $S$ would be justified.
2.  $S$ does believe $p$, and $S$ is justified.

\noindent The first sense is the *propositional* sense of justification,
the subject being the proposition of the belief state. The second sense
is about *doxastic* justification, which refers just to the belief
state. To say that "$S$ is justified in believing $p$" could mean either
that *the proposition* is justified or that *the belief is justified*.
The distinction also captures that a believer might have justification
for some proposition, that is have the doxastic sort, but the
propositions believed do not actually transfer justification, that is
have the propositional sort of justification.

So which is important to the argument presented here for the infinitist
solution to (RP)? Well, perhaps both, but at least doxastic
justification is necessary for anyone to be justified at all. In
"Infinitism is the Solution to the Regress Problem", Klein's objections
to foundationalism and coherentism, as we will see, concern doxastic
justification because the case concerns actual epistemic agents
occurently holding propositional beliefs. (RP) is most directly about
this variety of justification, because knowledge is not just about how
propositions can be related justifiably but about how *believed*
propositions can be related justifiably.

### Transfer vs. Emergent Justification

An important notion to understanding the infinitist position is
*emergence*, and specifically an emergent property. On its own it is
perhaps a metaphysical concept, it is epistemology when a certain
epistemological property like justification is said to be emergent. To
get an intuitive grasp of what an emergent property is, consider some
phenomena like, "animal." A biological cell on its own is not an animal,
any single organ or even organ system does not constitute an animal, the
property of being an animal *emerges* out of many animal cells and
organs working in a certain functional relationship to one another.

What relevance does this emergence have for justification? First, lets
consider the conventional view of justification-transfer and see how
this emergence might inform an alternative. Foundationalists think that
justification is a property of a single proposition that "flows" from
the justified foundational belief to all the others via some proper
rules for reasoning. Foundationalist hold that justification originates
in that basic proposition and is *transferred* to epistemically latter
propositions.

But coherentists cannot hold this view. The coherent approach to
responding to (RP) views the proper series of reasons as one which
"loops" in on itself. If justification is transferred in the same way as
in justification-transfer foundationalism, then coherentists think the
proper mode of reasoning is circular, and as Klein points out, no
philosopher could accept this [@kleinginet2014, 2435]. The account that
coherentists give is that justification is a property of *a set* of
propositions, that justification *emerges* from a set of beliefs. The
Justification-emergent view is that justification is a property of a set
of propositions and not any particular proposition.

What reason is there for thinking that justification is a property of a
set of propositions and not any particular proposition? Consider these
two propositions:

> 1.  No human is a horse.
> 2.  Plato is not a horse.

\noindent Notice that if one were to take "Plato is not a horse." to be
the questioned proposition, and your justifying reason was that "No
human is a horse.", the statements mutually support one another. Plato's
not being a horse makes it more likely that no human is a horse and no
human being a horse makes it more likely that Plato is not a horse. If
you have a list of $n$ humans and their statuses as horses, the
propositions in the set would all mutually support one another in this
way. The rational credence for every member of the set would raise with
every subsequent "X is not a horse." proposition. This is how
justification can be emergent.

The logical space of possible views is as follows:

1.  Justification-transfer foundationalism;
2.  Justification-emergent foundationalism;
3.  Justification-transfer coherentism;
4.  Justification-emergent coherentism;
5.  Justification-transfer infinitism;
6.  Justification-emergent infinitism.

\noindent The reason that (2) is not a tenable view is that a
justification-emergent foundationalism will posit that "justification
emerges from a chain of reasoning with a foundational reason", and that
is to just say that the foundational reason confers, that is transfers,
justification. Alternatively, the set of propositions is not justified
until it has the foundational reason, so justification may as well be a
property of the foundational reason. Justification-transfer coherentism,
that is (3), is not a tenable view because it endorses a
thinly-disguised form of circular reasoning. The reason we should
discount (5) is that it would be arbitrary in practice, some epistemic
prior would always be posited to have the justificatory power. But never
mind, perhaps it is a view that could be argued for, but as we shall
see, it is not the view Klein argues for. The views still on the table,
then, are (1), (4), and (6).

So which account does Klein's infinitism use? Here is Klein on the
matter:

> Infinitism is like the warrant-emergent form of coherentism because it
> holds that [justification] for a questioned proposition emerges as the
> proposition becomes embedded in a set of propositions.

\noindent He endorses (5), then. His argument, described below, will be
eliminative and have the following form:

1.  We can be justified.
2.  (2), (3), and (5) are not tenable.
3.  We cannot practice (1) and (3).
4.  $\therefore$ The correct view is (6).

### Doxastic Justification Emergence

(RP), as we saw in the previous subsection, is concerned first and
foremost with doxastic justification, and concerned with propositional
justification only through it. Of emergent justification, Klein says
that "[justification] for a questioned proposition emerges as the
proposition becomes embedded in a set of propositions." In "Human
Knowledge and the Infinite Regress of Reasons", Klein endorses the view
that $S$ is *doxastically justified* in $p$ if and only if "$S$ has
engaged in tracing the reasons in virtue of which the proposition $p$ is
justified far enough forward to satisfy the contextually determined
requirements." How are these two views related?

To demonstrate how they are related, consider this abstract reasoning
session where I will point out each notion at work and then generalize
into a principle.

> Ivan: $p$
>
> Doris: Why believe that $p$?
>
> Ivan: $r_1$
>
> Doris: Why believe that $r_1$?
>
> Ivan: $r_2$
>
> ...
>
> Doris: Why believe that $r_{n - 1}$?
>
> Ivan: $r_n$

\noindent What the notion of justification emergence has to say about
this dialogue is that justification is a property of the following set:
$\lbrace p, r_1, r_2, ..., r_n \rbrace$. The notion of doxastic
justification plays the role of determining how many beliefs need be in
the set for Ivan to have knowledge that $p$, that is $n$. Perhaps in a
low-standards context only a few are required but in high-standards
contexts perhaps hundreds are needed. Where these notions overlap in a
single reasoning session open some interesting questions. For instance,
if Ivan has successfully traced the number of reasons to satisfy a
high-standards contexts for knowledge, must he doxastically hold all of
the beliefs in the chain? Or can he "doxastically drop" some of the
reasons in the middle of the chain while maintaining *propositionally*
justified in those reasons? The view, taken together, is something like
this:

> $S$ is justified in $p$ if and only if $S$ has embedded $p$ in a set
> of believed propositions by tracing the reasons in virtue of which $S$
> is justified in $p$ from which the emergent justification is enough to
> satisfy the requirements of some context $C$.

While some of the questions left open here are interesting in their own
right and would warrant further work, what should be taken away from
this discussion is that the infinitist can have a view in which
justification emerges from a set of mutually supporting propositions of
which there will be infinitely many, and each of which the agent has
some doxastic attitude towards.

### Principles for Infinitism

Klein argues that infinitism follows from two epistemic principles, the
Principle of Avoiding Circularity (PAC) and the Principle of Avoiding
Arbitrariness (PAA).

> (PAC): For all propositions, $x$, if $x$ is warranted for a person,
> $S$, at $t$, then for all $y$, if $y$ is in the reason-ancestry of $x$
> for $S$ at $t$, then $x$ is not in the reason-ancestry of $y$ for $S$
> at t.

(PAC) asserts that for any proposition which a person has reason for
believing, the proposition which the person has reasons for should not
be in the reason-ancestry of itself. The motivation for accepting this
principle is the same motivation behind fallaciously reasoning via
begging the question. While Klein spends about as much time covering
linear-coherence theories as others have given to infinitist theories
[@klein1999human, 298][@kleinginet2014, 2506], those that agree about
the wrongness of circular reasoning should be able to accept (PAC).

However, there are good reasons (and hopefully infinitely many) for
accepting (PAC). Because we are looking to answer (RP), the relevant
question is: How could circularity ever raise the rational credence of a
questioned proposition? Specifically, notice that transfer-coherence
theories are going to allow a reasoner to be able to set the rational
credence of any given proposition and its negation both to $1.0$, where
the possible values are between $0$ and $1$. Consider: If you can admit
a proposition, say $p$, into the reason ancestry for itself, then the
credence for $p$ will be $1.0$ because trivially $p \to p$. But you can
also reason about $\lnot p$, and admit $\lnot p$ into the reason
ancestry for itself. A reasoner will always be able to generate a
credence of $1.0$ for any $p$ and $\lnot p$. This contradiction is fatal
to transfer-coherence theories.

The second principle required is,

> (PAA) For all propositions, $x$, if $x$ is warranted for a person,
> $S$, at $t$, then there is some reason, $r_1$, available to $S$ for
> $x$ at $t$; and there is some reason, $r_2$ available to $S$ for $r_1$
> at $t_1$ etc., and there is no last reason in the series.

There are two important notions in this principle: *availability* and
*reasons*. The crucial point about availability for formulating
infinitism is that for a proposition to be available, it need not be
occurently believed. Availability is best described by the example given
in Klein, where "$352 + 226 = 578$" is available to all with the
appropriate algebraic notions, but may never be instantiated.
Furthermore, the belief will have infinitely many possible justifying
reasons, where, for instance, "$352 + 227 \neq 578$",
"$352 + 228 \neq 578$", etc, all of which may or may not ever be
instantiated.

The conception of reasons can remain open-ended to formulate infinitism.
There need only be a correct account, and the reader is free to accept
their favorite account. Some examples include probabilistic reasoning, a
social conceptions, a virtue account, and process reliablism. This is
where many misconceptions of infinitism arise. Infinitism *does not*
hold that any cited chain is infinite, which is the motivation behind
the finite mind objection. Infinitism *does* hold that no reason can
escape further questioning, which is why self-justifying or
meta-justifying foundationalism will fail.

### The Interrogation Argument

Klein argues that neither foundationalism nor coherentism, the former
necessarily warrant-transfer and the latter either warrant-transfer or
warrant-emergent, can solve (RP). He shows this by means of a
conversation between two agents, representing the viewpoints of a
foundationalist, coherentist, and a doubter. The Interrogation Argument
concerns doxastic justification, as it actually instantiates the
propositions as beliefs. Furthermore, the Interrogation Argument is
about the *practice* of the solutions to (RP). As such, it does not
argue that foundationalism or coherentism are wrong, but rather, that a
self-conscious practitioner will not be able non-arbitrarily or
consistently use those theories to raise their level of justification
for a believed proposition. It is really important to note that Klein in
*not* arguing that any of these theories are incorrect, but rather that
neither foundationalism nor coherentism can provide a solution to (RP)
*because* they cannot be "employed by a self-conscious practitioner to
increase the rational credibility of a questioned proposition." Let this
be expressed by:

> (USP) An account of justification should be useable by a
> self-conscious practitioner to increase the credibility of questioned
> propositions.

To represent the doubter, Klein uses the name Doris. In the conversation
regarding foundationalism, the other participant's name is Fred. Fred
asserts that $p$. Doris asks Fred for his reason for believing $p$, to
which Fred responds $r_1$. The next natural question that Doris poses is
what are Fred's reasons for $r_1$? The response is $r_2$, and this back
and forth goes on for some time. Finally, Fred comes to $b$, which is a
foundational belief. Fred asserts that it is no longer appropriate to
ask of $b$ the question asked of $r_1 \dots r_n$. Doris's next question
is much different, asking of Fred, "I grant that $b$ has autonomous
warrant. But what I want to know is whether autonomously warranted
propositions are, in virtue of that fact, somewhat likely to be true."

There are only three possible doxastic attitude with regards to a
proposition: assent, dissent, or restraint. Fred has these three options
with regards to Doris's question about the relationship between
autonomous warrant and truth. Fred's options:

1.  He can *assent to* whether autonomously warranted propositions are
    somewhat likely to be true in virtue of the fact that they are
    autonomously warranted.
2.  He can *dissent from* whether autonomously warranted propositions
    are somewhat likely to be true in virtue of the fact that they are
    autonomously warranted.
3.  He can *restrain from* whether autonomously warranted propositions
    are somewhat likely to be true in virtue of the fact that they are
    autonomously warranted.

The problem is now clear: Fred has a trilemma where none of options are
tenable. If Fred assents to the that autonomously warranted propositions
are likely to be true in light of there being autonomously warranted,
then, Klein argues, "*the regress has continued*." Fred now has to
produce his reasons for thinking that any proposition, in this case $b$,
with the property of autonomous warrant, $F$, is likely to be true, and
this continues *ad infinitum*. If Fred sees this and either dissents or
withholds judgment, then his belief set and their justification
relationships are somehow "not likely to be true." This would solve the
regress but transfer no warrant.

Klein crafts a similar argument for coherentism, where instead of Fred
the foundationalist, there is Carl the coherentist. Carl faces a
trilemma just like Fred's, where Doris questions Carl about whether a
coherent set of propositions is likely to be true. If Carl dissents or
withholds, then why should we adopt coherent sets of beliefs over
incoherent sets? If Carl assents, then the regress continues. Thus,
Klein concludes, coherentism cannot be the solution to the regress
problem, as a coherentist cannot increase credibility of propositions.

Thus, because the only two logical possibilities besides infinitism are
inconsistent or arbitrary in practice, we have reason to believe that
infinitism is the solution to (RP). Although this assumes justifiedness
is even possible, that the regress does not lead to skepticism, the
scope of that project is too great to do justice in a piece on
infinitism. The responses that Klein gives to the best objections to
skepticism offer some positive reasons for accepting infinitism. This is
the eliminative argument for infinitism.

What this puts in the toolkit of the infinitist is requiring a response
from competing views as to either what wrong about the interrogation or
which horn of the trilemma is actually acceptable. This is the argument
that Ginet objects to, and he takes the approach of accounting for
what's gone wrong in the interrogation.

Existing Objections to Infinitism
---------------------------------

This work will consider two objections to infinitism, from Ginet and
Bergmann.

### Ginet's "Reply to Klein"

The format of the book is such that first, Klein answers "yes" to the
question of whether infinitism is the solution to (RP). Second, Ginet
answers "no" to the question of whether infinitism is the solution to
(RP). Third, Klein is given an opportunity to retort. Finally, Ginet is
given the last word, responding to Klein's retort. This section will
outline that last retort. The section of Ginet's reply which is relevant
is the first, titled "Fred and Doris."

#### Interpreting Ginet's response

Let the questioned proposition that Fred and Doris are trying to raise
the rational credence for be the following:

> $(1)$ Little Benny has been in the living room with blue paint on his
> hands.

\noindent Doris asks Fred why he thinks this is so, and Fred dutifully
answers:

> $(2)$ There's a blue smear on the wall.

\noindent Predictably, Doris ask for Fred's reason, to which Fred
responds:

> $(p)$ I see a blue smear on a white surface right in front of me.

\noindent Ginet now says that Fred has run out of reasons from which he
could infer $(p)$ from, but being both an epistemologist and a parent,
Fred can entertain Doris' predictable questions. He says that Fred "has
no reason for thinking that [he] see[s] a blue smear on a white surface"
in the sense which there is a premise and conclusion, but it is
"eminently reasonable" because of:

> $(\mathrm{C})$ My visual experience is as if I see such a thing and I
> am aware of no reason to think that my visual experience might in this
> case be misleading me.

\noindent Breaking a bit from her usual style, Ginet's Doris points out
that $(\mathrm{C})$ commits Fred to the following two conjuncts:

> $(r_1)$ When $(\mathrm{C})$ obtains, it is *likely to be true* that I
> see a blue smear on a white surface.
>
> $(r_2)$ $(\mathrm{C})$ does obtain.

\noindent And Doris further asks whether it is only because these
beliefs are available to him as reasons for believing $p$ that he is
justified in believing $p$. Fred sees what's coming, the hard trilemma
of the Interrogation Argument, and so retreats somewhat on $r_{1}$ to a
weaker first half of the conjunct:

> $(r_1 *)$ When $(\mathrm{C})$ obtains, it is *reasonable for me* to
> believe that ($p$).

\noindent Ginet notes that he is not persuaded that this reason for $p$
constitutes *Fred's actual reason* for believing it, but assumes for the
sake of argument is "at least part of" Fred's justification.[^3]

Doris now asks for a reason to believe $(r_1 *) \land (r_2)$, and Ginet
would have Fred answer that: First, of $(r_1 *)$,

> I need no premise from which to infer $(r_1 *)$. This is because
> $(r_1 *)$ is a basic *a priori* principle constitutive of the concept
> of justification for belief in a particular proposition like ($p$): it
> is a principle that understanding it requires accepting it.

\noindent Secondly, of $(r_2)$, "Nor do I need a premise from which to
infer $(r_2$)." This is because the following is a "basic *a priori*
principle constitutive of the concept of justification for
conscious-state propositions like $(r_2)$":

> $(r_{3})$: When $(\mathrm{C})$ obtains, and one is prompted by that
> fact to believe that $(\mathrm{C})$ obtains, then that belief is
> justified.

This is quite hard to follow, but what I take Ginet to be saying is
this, where "$\rightharpoondown$" is "$x$ is the basic *a priori*
principle from which $y$ is derived", "$\to$" is "$x$ justifies for Fred
that $y$", and "$\rightharpoonup$" is "$x$ makes eminently reasonable
that $y$":
$$(((r_{3}) \rightharpoondown (r_2)) \land (r_1 *)) \to (\mathrm{C}) \rightharpoonup (p) \to (2) \to (1)$$

\noindent Which translates to: "When $(\mathrm{C})$ obtains, and one is
prompted by that fact to believe that $(\mathrm{C})$ obtains, then that
belief is justified." is the *a priori* principle from which Fred's
belief about propositions like "$(\mathrm{C})$ does obtain." follows
from, which along with his belief that "When $(\mathrm{C})$ obtains, it
is reasonable for me to believe that ($p$)." justifies that "My visual
experience is as if I see such a thing and I am aware of no reason to
think that my visual experience might in this case be misleading me."
which makes eminently clear that ($p$) which justifies that (2) which
justifies that (1).

#### Criticizing Ginet's response

This response to Klein's Interrogation Argument is not successful
because it is hinged on a principle that either continues the regress if
true or solves nothing if false. I think there are more reasons to
believe that $(r_3)$ is false than there are reasons to believe it
continues the regress, but this work will cover both. First, the
argument *against* $(r_3)$ will comprise of a straightforward
counterexample to the principle coming from Collier, giving reason to
doubt it. Second, my argument assuming that $r_3$ is true will show that
the regress continues, and use a conclusion from the argument against
$(r_3)$ to undermine a move Ginet might make in response.

##### First, the case that $(r_3)$ is false

Ginet asserts that "When $(\mathrm{C})$ obtains and one is prompted by
that fact to believe $(\mathrm{C})$ obtains, then that belief is
justified." This is the causal theory of knowledge from the perspective
of justification. Where Ginet writes "prompted," I read it to be is
synonymous with "caused." Revising $(r_3)$ to reflect this, the
condition on justification that we are considering is:

> (CJ) If $(\mathrm{C})$ obtains and $S$ is caused by that fact to
> believe $(\mathrm{C})$ obtains, then that belief is justified for $S$.

In the context of the discussion between Doris and Fred, (CJ) requires
that Fred's belief that there is a blue smear on a white surface be
caused, in some sense, by the state of affairs described by "the blue
smear on the white surface." This is a straightforward instance of Alvin
Goldman's causal theory of knowledge from the perspective of
justification. But this is a bad requirement on justification, because
there is a counterexample to the causal theory of knowing found in
Kenneth Collier's "Contra the Causal Theory of Knowing."

Here is the counterexample applied to Fred. Ginet requires (CJ), that
for a belief to be justified, it must be somehow caused by the state of
affairs described by the contents of that belief. Say that Doris,
unbeknownst to Fred, administers to him a hallucinogenic drug, and one
of the affects of the drug is that he believes that his hallucinations
are actually not hallucinations, but real. One of the hallucinations
this drug induces is the hallucination that Doris gave the drug to Fred,
and that he believes this hallucination to be real. Collier gives Ginet
a dilemma, he must hold either that (1) Fred knows Doris gave him the
drug, or that (2) Fred does not know Doris gave him the drug, that the
causal connection is somehow broken [@collier1973contra].

If the causal theorist says that (1), Fred does know that Doris gave him
the drug, then they need explain how this particular hallucination is
different from other hallucinations, and it does not seem relevantly
different. Perhaps, Collier wonders, what is different is that other
more normal hallucinations are not true. But this is not promising
because if the drug causes in Fred the belief that there is a blue smear
on a white surface in front of him and *there is* a blue smear on a
white surface in front of him, the intuition is that he still does not
know.[^4] The causal theorist objects to this that there is no causal
connection when Fred hallucinates about the blue smear. Even so, it
could be posited that there is a causal connection and there still be no
knowledge, because Fred could have been told in advance or had some sort
of suspicion. That would mean his justification that there is a blue
smear in front of him, that is $C$, was caused *by the fact that* $C$,
and still the intuition should be this hallucination is not knowledge.
If the causal theorist says that (2) Fred does not know, then there
needs to be an account of proper causation not found in Ginet, but
perhaps exists.[^5]

Perhaps you do not accept this argument, or maybe you think that there
are good candidates which are not *ad hoc* to defend against Colliers'
counterexample. It will not save Ginet's reply, however, because the
only conclusion my overall argument *needs* to draw from this is:

> (RD) One can understand $(r_3)$ and have reason to doubt it.

\noindent In the next section, I will use this as a premise against a
complaint Ginet will raise of my second argument.

##### Second, assuming $(r_3)$ is true, it fixes nothing

(RP) is looking for the series of reasons which can raise the rational
credence of a proposition. Klein's interrogation argument operates under
(USP), and that means we can ask whether certain propositions would
raise the rational credence for any agent, namely Fred. On this note, I
believe that relations like "$p$ follows from the basic a priori
principle $q$" and "$p$ makes $q$ eminently clear" are one which raise
rational credence. Additionally, I will show that not only does "*the
regress continue*", but that Doris now has two questions she can raise
instead of just one.

First, when Doris asks Fred why he believes that $(r_1 *)$, $(r_3)$ is a
great reason to believe $(r_1 *)$, as it is the general form.
Furthermore, Doris is granting that $(r_3)$ is true. Now, one question
that Doris can ask of Fred is, why does Fred believe that $(r_3)$? That
is, why believe that "[w]hen $(\mathrm{C})$ obtains, and one is prompted
by that fact to believe that $(\mathrm{C})$ obtains, that belief is
justified?" While Ginet says that Fred does not need it "as a premise
from which to infer $(r_1 *)$", it has to be true that $(r_3)$ raises
the rational credence of $(r_1 *)$. This is reasonable because if a
rational agent knew it was true that $(r_3)$, that is the general case,
it would be true that $(r_1 *)$, which is the specific instantiation of
$(r_3)$ for blue smears on white surfaces. There must be a reason for
$(r_3)$ to be true. This reason, say $(r_4)$, would raise the rational
credence for a self-conscious agent in the questioned proposition. And
"*the regress has continued*."

To this, Ginet will complain that he posited that to understand
$(r_1 *)$ requires accepting it, and that perhaps Doris is not
understanding it. Understanding $(r_1 *)$ does not require accepting it,
because (RD). What I concluded from my discussion about the reasons to
think that $(r_3)$ is false is that, at very least, there is reason to
doubt $(r_3)$, and because it is the general form of propositions like
$(r_1 *)$, there is reason to doubt $(r_1 *)$ as well.

Second, and much more straightforwardly, I see no defense in Ginet from
Doris merely asking, "Why believe that $(r_2)$?" That is, "Why believe
that '$(\mathrm{C})$ does obtain.'?" Ginet says "It is clear that
$(r_3)$ could not serve as a premise in an inference justifying belief
in $(r_2)$." Thus, thankfully, Doris keeps doubting.

#### Conclusion

While a formidable elucidation of the disagreement between infinitists
and foundationalists, Ginet's response does not successfully answer (The
Regress Problem (RP) as it has been formulated here. If $(r_{3})$ is
true, then the regress continues in more ways than one, and if $(r_{3})$
is false, then the response fails.

### Bergmann's Doxastic Dilemma

Michael Bergmann, in his paper "Is Klein an infinitist about doxastic
justification?" makes three points about infinitism found in Klein's
"Human Knowledge and the Infinite Progress of Reasoning." First, he
thinks that Klein does not have an infinitist solution to the Regress
Problem. Second, he poses a dilemma for Klein where he thinks neither
horn is acceptable. Third, he holds that Klein's objection to
foundationalism fails. I'll interpret and respond to all three points.

#### Klein's solution isn't infinitist

The way that Bergmann sets up (RP) is explicit in that he has all the
premises and conclusions listed and numbered one through nine. He seems
to think that Klein must claim that either (1) our beliefs can be
inferentially justified only if the belief from which it is inferred
aren't justified *or* (2) our beliefs can't be justified via an infinite
chain of reasoning, but, strangely, that he cannot reject both. What's
gone wrong here is that Bergmann is thinking that Klein holds that
justification is *transferred* from epistemically prior reasons, where
Klein actually thinks that doxastic justification is an emergent
property of a set of believed propositions. Bergmann acknowledges this
view in a footnote, but ascribes it to holistic coherentists solely.

The next move that Bergmann makes is to use Klein's definition of
doxastic justification to show that he must reject (1) and therefore
adopt an unjustified foundations view instead of an infinitist view.
Bergmann is right that Klein rejects (1), but Klein also rejects (2). In
the next section, I'll show how Klein can reject (1) and be an
infinitist.

#### Interpreting Bergmann's dilemma

Bergmann takes Klein's account of doxastic justification to be $S$ is
doxastically justified in believing $p$ if and only if "$S$ has engaged
in tracing the reasons in virtue of which the proposition $p$ is
justified far enough forward to satisfy the contextually determined
requirements." For example, take context $C$ where a $S$ holds $B_1$,
and this is based on some prior $B_2$, and so on until some contextually
determined end $B_x$.

The way that Bergmann interprets this is that Klein thinks that $B_1$ is
*based on* $B_2$. He expresses this principle:

> **(K1)**: For a belief $B$ to be doxastically justified, it must be
> based on some other belief.

Because for any $B_x$, there is going to be no prior, K1 claims the
belief will not be justified. But Bergmann thinks it's even more
worrying when combined with the doxastic version of the above:

> **(K2)**: A belief can be doxastically justified by being based on
> some other belief only if that other belief is itself doxastically
> justified.

This results in none of the chain of doxastically held beliefs to be
justified. This commits Klein to unjustified foundations instead of
infinitism.

Klein must either accept or reject (K2). If he rejects (K2), then he
endorses unjustified foundations view and not infinitism. Rejecting (K2)
commits Klein to the view that "a belief can be justified even if the
reason one has for it is an unjustified belief" [@bergmann2007klein,
23]. Accepting (K2) commits Klein to an agent holding to hold infinitely
many beliefs to be justified, which is absurd.

#### Criticizing Bergmann's dilemma

The account of doxastic justification attributed to Klein in "Is Klein
an infinitist about doxastic justification?" would commit him to
Bergmann's problematic dilemma. What has gone wrong, I think, is that
Bergmann has wrongly interpreted Klein's account of propositional
justification from his account of doxastic justification. As we noted in
the interpretation of infinitism, what Klein holds that infinitism
shares with foundationalism is that some beliefs and their propositions
are epistemically prior to others. This is what Bergmann is picking up
from his reading. However, what infinitism shares with the defensible
varieties of coherentism is that a questioned belief becomes
increasingly justified by being embedded in a *set* of propositions or
beliefs. It's this that Bergmann gets wrong about infinitism.

Klein would hold that for $S$'s questioned belief $B_1$ to be
doxastically justified the belief must be embedded in a set of beliefs,
of which there are now two. For it to be propositionally justified, it
must have an epistemic prior. For it to be doxastically justified, the
context somehow determines how many beliefs have to be in the set for
there to be sufficient justification. Thus, Klein rejects (1) in favor
of a Justification-emergent view of doxastic justification. This is
compatible with rejecting (2), that our beliefs cannot be justified via
infinite chains of reasoning.

#### Bergmann's defense of foundationalism

The way that Bergmann interprets the Interrogation Argument is as being
hinged on the following claim:

> **(K3)** If Fred sees what is coming and refrains from making any of
> those three responses, he is holding unexamined beliefs and is not an
> epistemically responsible agent.

There are only two ways that Bergmann thinks this requirement could be
satisfied. It must either be satisfied by basing $b$ on an justified
belief *or* basing $b$ on a unjustified belief. If it is based on a
justified belief, it expresses (K2) and leads to an infinite regress of
reasons that need to be doxastic. The second option is the unjustified
foundations view, which is useless.

Bergmann is right that the second option would be useless, because we
don't want to need to be committed to reasoning from unjustified
beliefs. However, Bergmann is wrong to think that the first option leads
to needing to hold infinitely many beliefs. The reason it doesn't lead
to being committed to an infinitely many beliefs is that the substitute
account of doxastic justification is an emergent sort, that the belief
can be justified without a doxastic foundation.

Perhaps (K3) is unacceptable, but it not going to be on these grounds.

A New Objection for Infinitism
------------------------------

Conclusion
----------

[@kleinturriiep2014]

\clearpage 
\begin{center} References \end{center}

[^1]: To stay consistent, I will change "warrant" to "justification"
    where appropriate.

[^2]: There are, however, mainstream epistemologists who reject the
    belief, justification, and truth conditions. See: Radford (1966) for
    rejecting the belief condition, Kornblith (2008) for rejecting the
    justification condition, or Hazlett (2010) for rejecting the truth
    condition.

[^3]: This is a very interesting aside found in Ginet, and I ask that
    the reader remember this for when I consider a new problem for
    infinitism. I think what motivated Ginet in this comment is the same
    motivation behind one of Bergmann's objections.

[^4]: The causal theorist is welcome to disagree here, as intuitions do
    vary, but I must admit I think this comes at great cost.

[^5]: Some suggestions that motivate (2) from Goldman's 1976
    "Discrimination and Perceptual Knowledge" are that perhaps Fred
    needs to *rule out relevant alternative* or be able to *perceptually
    discriminate* between a hallucination and not in order to know.
    These are good candidates, but there discussion is not suitable
    here.

