Mill’s *Utilitarianism* and Virtue <small>by Paul Jones</small>
===============================================================

A moral theory is a theory which posits that something is valuable,
pleasure, virtue, duty, or self-interest, for example. Any new moral
treatise which seeks to persuade must respond to other preexisting
ethical frameworks. There are only two options: (1) to invalidate the
other theory, to disprove it, or (2) show how the preexisting theory is
both valid and a part of the new theory, encompassed by it. John Stuart
Mill wrote his moral treatise, *Utilitarianism*, in a period in
intellectual history dominated by Aristotelian virtue and Kantian
deontology, as well as the intensely conservative political and social
climate of Victorian England. *Utilitarianism* was intended to convince
the public of Mill’s first principle. Mill responds to preexisting
ethical frameworks, namely virtue ethics, deontology, Christian ethics,
and egoism. Except for egoism, Mill invariably shows how other moral
theories and values are actually or can become part of his first
principle. The most prominent response in the text is his amalgamation
of virtue ethics, which spans all of Chapter 4. Mill is successful in
his synthesis of virtue ethics, despite philosophical sloppiness and
logical fallacies. In his success, Mill crafted an impartial standard
which the moral claims of other theories can by compared against.

It is in Chapter 4 of *Utilitarianism* that Mill addresses virtue the
most directly. He begins his argument by stating that virtue can
actually be an end to human action besides happiness. Mill agrees with
his opponents that there are people who desire or approve of acts
according to virtue and absence of vice instead of the pleasure and the
absence of pain. The reason this is significant is because if this is a
descriptive fact, a truth, then it would pose a problem for Mill’s
inductive proof of Utility, which hinges on the observation that
happiness is desired and therefore desirable. If there are people who
genuinely value virtue as the criteria of right and wrong, of how one
should act, then, at very least, happiness is not the only first
principle, which is what the Utilitarian claims. The solution to this
problem for utilitarianism is to either swallow the intuitively unsavory
conclusion that virtue is without value, or show that virtue actually
has value belonging to, part of, or from happiness.

Taking the latter approach, Mill states that where opponents make their
mistake is in believing that utility is incompatible with virtue. Mill
holds that virtue is not only valuable as a means to pleasure, but in
fact as an end in itself. Virtue and happiness are perceived to be
different, but Mill attempts to show that this is superficial. It is by
seeking virtue disinterestedly and for its own sake that virtue can
become part of pleasure, Mill claims. One can value virtue as an end for
its own sake because the parts of happiness are various, and not a
single, abstract whole. The mind that is most capable of aiding the
general happiness is the mind which values virtue in and of itself. If
one lives in a society where each individual is acting according to
virtue, then the happiness of that individual will be greater, as he can
learn to appreciate the quality of this pleasure, and the happiness of
the society will be greater. The reason that Mill thinks this is true is
because of his belief that one is not the most happy when one is not
acting conscientious of virtue. It is an example of a pleasure of high
quality, one of the pleasures that swine are incapable of, because
beings of faculties not sufficiently high enough be able of holding a
conception of virtue can not experience the happiness it can produce. By
claiming that virtue can become part of pleasure, through development
and socialization, Mill both avoids the objection that Utilitarianism
ignores virtue and incorporates it into his theory. This is the claim,
however, and it requires some nature of proof.

Mill provides this through use of argument by analogy. He believes that
a relationship parallel to pleasure and virtue is the relationship
between pleasure and money. Money is an example of an end which is not
in an of itself valuable to bringing about pleasure, it is valuable only
for the relationships it has to other items which are part of pleasure.
Money is simply an object with no inherent value. Mill claims that,
psychologically, people have a tendency and ability to make those things
that lead to the satisfaction of basic desires become themselves
desirable. Mill believes that people do not value money solely as a
means to other ends, that the desire for money is so strong that it
becomes an end unto itself, as virtue can. Those things which are
desired originally as a means to happiness can be desired so strongly
that they become an ingredient in happiness, in its complex and various
parts. As further evidence, Mill argues that for any given source of
pleasure or exemption from pain, like music and health, one both desires
them as the means to utility and as part of the end, which is utility.

Mill uses this analogy to amalgamate Aristotelian virtue ethics into
utilitarianism by claiming that virtue is an item of the same
description as money, music, and health. Virtue is a goal which can
become part of pleasure, a means that becomes an end, desired for its
own sake. This is important for Mill because his claim that there is
nothing but pleasure to be inherently desired would conflict with his
admission that there are people who hold a descriptive desire for
virtue. To handle this problem, Mill shows how virtue could come to be
valued as a pleasure and thus for its own sake too. This is because Mill
believes virtue ought be valued because of its conduciveness to some of
the many parts of utility. Utilitarianism, Mill says, “tolerates and
approves” of acquired pleasures, like virtue, up until they are harmful
to the acquirer, saying they are vital to the general happiness. If
virtue is vital to the general happiness, and happiness is the only
thing which is to be desired and valued, then valuing virtue is part of
valuing pleasure. The validity or invalidity of this argument requires
that the reader reflect on his own experience. Mill’s argument is a
practical one, one catered for humanity. It does not view morality as
being an objective fact nested in reality. This is why Mill closes his
argument by asking the “thoughtful” reader to consider it. This analogy
is only valid if the reader believes it to be true about himself.

There are a slew of fallacies that Mill commits throughout his proof.
Not only that, but overall, Mill’s proof is imprecise at times and
lacking in rigor. Despite this, Mill ultimately succeeds in his argument
because the standards that he sets for success are met by his own theory
(depending on the reader). His standards for success are found both in
his goals with the proof and the other aspects of his theory. Mill
believes that first principles do not admit of proof, and so he
inductively moves from amalgamating utility with virtue to the fact that
utility as a first principle is true. First, I will show both that Mill
is sloppy with fallacies and rigor and still successful in his
inductively proof from the example virtue. Then, I will argue that the
significant part of Mill’s proof is not specifically virtue, but rather
the means which he uses virtue to prove utility.

Beginning with the naturalistic fallacy, Mill argues, “... [T]he sole
evidence it is possible to produce that anything is desirable is that
people desire it.” As Mill points out earlier in *Utilitarianism*, the
relevant question is not what people do value, but what people ought
value. This is the classic, and related, issue of Hume’s is-ought
problem. The fact that people do desire pleasure says nothing about
whether people ought value pleasure. So, if the goal is to deduce the
system of morality that is objectively right or found in nature,
depending on one’s metaphysics, Mill fails to provide it. Furthermore,
by not addressing the issue directly, Mill is lacking in rigor.

While not obvious, Mill does provide a solution to this. Most simply,
should one accept Mill’s point that questions of ultimate ends are based
on an end to be good without proof, then this a clear example of a qualm
that Mill easily handles. More subtly, and should this not be enough,
the reason that this does not hinder Mill in his attempt to prove the
principle of utility is because his standards are not based on
metaphysics or ontology that requires morality to be “part of reality.”
Mill accepts, in Chapter 2, that morality is a “subjective feeling in
our own minds.” The naturalistic fallacy would be a devastating blow if
Mill was searching for a morality that was part of what he calls “things
in themselves.” By redefining the goal of an ethical theory and by
admitting that morality is a function of conscious experience and
psychological facts, Mill’s proof of utility survives the naturalistic
fallacy. For those who do not accept this rebuttal, it will be due to
disagreement with Mill on matters of metaphysics and ontology.

Mill can be accused of the fallacy of equivocation on two related
counts. In the same breath as the last charge, Mill equivocates how
being audible is a proof of audibility to how being desired is a proof
of desirability. Additionally, Mill equivocates how some thing can
possibly be desired to being the same as something which should be
desired. Being as these are handled by the same rebuttal, they will be
considered together. This is equivocation because one’s ability to hear
something proving audibility is not the same as desiring something
proving its desirability. While one is a human sense which has a
definitive threshold of sensitivity, the other is an ethical affair
without any similar threshold. If this is not enough, it is clear that
if someone desires to burn down another’s house, it does not make that
act of arson desirable. While there will be no argument offered to prove
this, I find it likely that no reasonable reader will object that this
is patently absurd, and likewise, Mill would surely agree. So why is
that Mill says this? and is his proof still successful?

This is solved by Mill’s conclusion to the chapter: he leaves the
proof’s validity to be considered by the thoughtful reader. What Mill
means by this is that if the readers disputes that one desires their own
happiness, then Mill’s argument does actually fail. There is nothing
that Mill can do to make the reader value their own happiness, or
health, or music ... if the reader does not “get it”, then the theory
does not apply to them. Mill’s wrote the proof under the impression that
any honest introspection will reveal that one does actually value one’s
own happiness, and that one’s happiness is desirable. Again, this is
relates to Mill’s ontology and metaphysics: his utilitarianism is not a
handing down of tablets of objective moral law. It is a theory which is
human, in that it is designed for humans and informed by facts about
humankind, and those are matters which are subject to the reader’s
consideration. Mill says this because he believes that no person after
honest introspection will disagree. His argument is still successful
because it only concerns those conscious beings who agree with Mill
about their own happiness. Where Kant seeks the objective moral law and
Aristotle seeks human perfection, Mill’s theory is satisfied with the
more conceivable goal of practical and subjective morality based on
utility.

Moving on from the first few sentences of the proof, Mill can be accused
of the fallacy of composition. His view is that people value their own
happiness, and that this implies that they also value the happiness of
others. This is necessary for Mill’s theory because it is how he escapes
ethical egoism, which he finds to be a disagreeable theory. Ethical
egoism is the only theory which Mill finds incompatible with
utilitarianism in the text, and it is, in part, with this reasoning that
he defeats egoism. The fallacy of composition is inferring some fact or
truth about a whole from one of its constituent parts. In this
particular argument, the whole being that everyone values everybody’s
happiness equally, and the part being that everyone individually values
their own happiness.

Mill indirectly address this objection throughout the book.
Utilitarianism, he believes, requires that moral agents act strictly
disinterestedly. Utility is a standard which can be impartially
consulted to resolve moral disagreements. He does not commit a fallacy
of composition because of utility is a model of comparison, and if
people simply valued their own happiness, it would be impossible to
resolve moral conflict. Again, Mill is crafting a theory which is meant
to be used by human beings. Further evidence of this exists in Chapter
5, in Mill’s definition of justice. Utility is a standard applied
without favor or preference for any person over another. Again, Mill is
imprecise and sloppy in that this is not directly addressed, and
requires some work by an honest reader Yet still, Mill remains
successful because a holistic view at his claim exonerates him of this
grievance.

Advancing through specific nitpicking, one can also dispute Mill’s
overall endeavor. Mill may seem to be indulging in contradiction by
saying that first principles do not admit of proof, and then attempting
to prove the principle of utility. Often in discussing Chapter 4,
critics will surround the word “proof” with quotes for this reason. This
misses the point of what Mill is trying to achieve, however. This is not
a contradiction because Mill’s empiricism and naturalism make his theory
one which is subject to review to evidence and review. Mill is
consulting what he believes are facts about the natural world and
presenting them as evidence in a inductive argument for utility. Not
only that, but Mill believes that it impossible to offer a deductive
proof, to go from a general theory to specific instances. What Mill does
in Chapter 4 is show how a specific instance admits to a general theory.
The underlying normative moral sentiment behind other moral theories is
utility.

Through all objections, then, Mill has been shown to be successful in
amalgamating utility with virtue. Despite being successful in his
inductive proof of utility by synthesizing virtue, for the modern
Utilitarian, hinging the problems of virtue ethics into utilitarianism
is as much unnecessary as those problems are easily solved by utility.
It is unnecessary because since Mill, the West has embraced his
“subversive” liberal and pluralist values, and has less of an ingrained
sense of necessary conservatism. This says nothing about what people
should value, obviously, but Mill’s underlying goal is to convince
people to lead the good life, to adopt happiness as a first principle.
There is no reason to bring virtue ethics into modern utilitarianism,
and Mill acknowledges this when he says that the utilitarian moralist
can form his own opinion about the source of virtue and of vice. The
form of Mill’s proof is inductive from virtue to utility, and what is
important about it is that it’s possible, that Mill was successful. This
suggests that no matter what the moral sentiment of a culture or age,
there exists a parallel proof akin to the one for virtue. There has been
lots of moral progress since Mill, both in culture and academia, and if
Mill’s theory is a good one, it should be able to account for that.

If utility can inherit varying systems of morality of different places
and eras, does it also inherit all of its problems? If so, then this
would be an example of how having specifically virtue as part of Mill’s
utility is dangerous. The problems of virtue ethics are easily solved
because Mill’s proof of utility is inductive from virtue, and likewise,
the answer to this question can be inductive from virtue. One of the
common problems with virtue ethics is that societies disagree about what
is a virtue and what is a vice. Victorian society, for instance, will
have held that virtues for women include such qualities as, “servility”,
“modesty”, or other discriminatory, sexist, impartial “virtues.” The way
that Mill solves this is by pointing out that utilitarianism embraces
virtue ethics up until the point that it becomes injurious to the
general happiness, and the repression of women is certainly injurious to
the general happiness. For having synthesized virtue into his own
theory, it is impressive that it can handle some of the objections that
virtue ethics struggles with without utility. Furthermore, it is
consistent with his claim that utility is what is used to impartially
resolve moral conflict. Mill applies this same process in
*Utilitarianism* to both deontology and Christian ethics. Just as with
virtue ethics, the problems found in deontology and Christian ethics can
be resolved by the impartial application of the standard of utility.
Utilitarianism recognizes the value of these external theories and
provides a way to both identify and rectify

The problems with virtue ethics do not, therefore, at all weaken Mill’s
proof of utility. The fact that Mill amalgamates virtue is not even the
significance of this argument. What is significant about Mill’s adding
of virtue to his synthesis is not actually virtue, but rather, *the type
of argument* which adds another dimension to the utilitarian calculus,
and a process by which to add external first principles consistently
with pleasure. Specifically, Mill’s achievement here is not that he
added virtue, but rather the type of argument which adds something like
virtue. This is consistent and indicative of Mill’s quality of pleasure
and belief in the proper socialization of humanity. By allowing the
utilitarian moralist to form his own opinions about virtue or other
values and integrate them into the first principle of utility, Mill has
created a much stronger theory.

This is why the chapter is entitled, “Of what sort of Proof the
Principle of Utility is Susceptible”, because Mill’s proof is a
metaethical one. Mill makes the descriptive psychological claim that one
will discover through honest introspection that one does desire one’s
own happiness. Then, through socialization and enculturation into the
polis, one comes to hold other first principles, other values, other
virtues. Mill’s metaethical claim is that it is through socialization
that these other first principles are tied into the first principle of
happiness. Plugging these into the Millian synthesis allows one to bring
accord and consistency to moral beliefs. Furthermore, Mill’s
incorporating of virtue into happiness reinforces how there are higher
pleasures. This amalgamation provides a strong example of a pleasure of
which swine are not capable, and of which the fool is ignorant of.

So not only is Mill successful in bringing virtue ethics into
utilitarianism, but he’s successful in creating a template by which
other theories can be synthesized with utility. Mill’s claim is that all
moral sentiments stem from a first principle that does not admit of
proof, and that that first principle is the concept of utility. By
providing one specific example, virtue, and showing how it actually
admits of his general concept, utility, Mill is successful crafting an
argument which allows people of all cultures and eras to systematize and
compare the worth their moral sentiments. For both the socially and
politically conservative Victorian England and the modern, liberal, and
pluralist West, the concept of utility endures as an impartial means to
determine the practical moral worth of actions and policies.

Works Cited
===========

1.  Mill, John Stuart. *Utilitarianism*. 1863.

