The Mutual Exclusivity of Utility and Liberty <small>by Paul Jones</small>
==========================================================================

John Stuart Mill had a prolific output, utilizing his impressive
education and undemanding profession to revolutionize philosophy. Of his
major publications, *On Libery* and *Utilitarianism* stand out as
complete and creative systemizations of the morality of happiness and
freedom. Neither work exists in a vacuum, however, and the truth or
falsity of claims made in *Utilitarianism* would affect the true of
falsity of claims in *On Liberty*, and vice-versa. Specifically, the
thesis of *Utilitarianism* is that happiness, the greatest pleasure for
the greatest number, and the avoidance of pain, are equivalent and the
only First Principle of morality. The thesis of *On Liberty* is that
society and the individual ought value liberty and freedom, and the
absolute right to unrestricted self-expression and thought. These two
theses span a shared jurisdiction, and are interrelated. There are
instances where one cannot abide by both the sanction of Mill’s First
Principle and of Mill’s Liberty Principle. Utility and liberty are two
separate goals, both for an individual and for society. Mill’s First
Principle of Utility and Mill’s Liberty and Harm Principles are not
totally internally consistent when considered together. There exists
scenarios where the holistic Millian may choose utility or he may choose
liberty, but not both. If this is the case, it must be ascertained which
is more valuable, the absolute freedom of expression or the *summum
bonum*. This work will show that there exists a conflict between liberty
and utility, and that even Mill would hold that the in these cases, one
ought to err on the side of utility.

Before looking at the intersection of the jurisdictions of Mill’s moral
and political theories, it would be helpful to consider them
individually. Mill’s first principle is utility, which holds that
actions are morally right if they promote happiness, and that actions
are morally wrong if they produce the reverse of happiness. Mill
believes that first principles do not admit of proof, and that the only
proof capable of showing that happiness is desirable is that happiness
is desired.

> ... if human nature is so constituted as to desire nothing which is
> not either a part of happiness or a means of happiness, we can have no
> other proof, and we require no other, that these are the only things
> desirable.

This is a practical proof and a descriptive fact, humans value happiness
and therefore ought to value it. While this is just a gloss, it is still
clear that this suffers issues of clarity and fallacy. Mill wrote this
under the impression that any honest and reasonable man, through
introspection, would find it true descriptively of himself. For those
who disagree about happiness, Mill’s proof fails.

Mill’s thesis throughout *On Liberty* is that the only legitimate
justification for societal interference in personal sovereignty is harm
to others. Other than this, Mill hold that one’s rights over oneself, in
both body and mind, are absolute. To express this, Mill outlines three
implicit principles: (1) The Liberty Principle, which states that we
ought to value liberty and freedom, resulting in an absolute liberty of
thought and action; (2) The Autonomy Principle, which dictates how one
ought use one’s own liberty, that one ought not use it to conquer the
world, but rather to promote self development, individuality, and the
cultivation of faculties; And (3) The Harm Principle, which defines that
society can have legitimate reasons to intervene in individual’s
liberty, either by force or public opinion. The legitimate reasons which
society can use for this interference with a person’s liberty of action
and expression is harm to others. Other than this one exception, each
individual holds an absolute liberty of conscience, taste, opinion, and,
most importantly to this work, speech. Not only that, but Mill believes
that this absolute right is ultimate beneficial to the general
happiness.

It is in Chapter 2 that Mill covers the absolute right of expression for
individuals. Mill believes that the silencing of any opinion, which is
equivalent to limiting a person’s freedom of expression, is assuming
one’s own infallibility. Further than that, Mill believes that the
silencing of any opinion detriments society. He begins his defense of
this by saying quite simply that this suppressed opinion may be true,
and for this reason, society should allow the opinion to exist. After
considering what he believes to be an exhaustive list of possible
consequences of suppression, Mill asserts that,

> Such prejudice, or oversight, when [a false belief] occurs, is
> altogether an evil; but it is one from which we cannot hope to be
> always exempt, and must be regarded as the price paid for an
> inestimable good.

What this means is that being as Mill’s epistemology does not hold that
man can know in advance whether an opinion is false or his own is true,
it is always dangerous to suppress another’s view.

Mill responds to four objections, and he claims that they are
exhaustive. The first objection is that if people and government are
obliged to act on what they believe to be true, then it would be
cowardice to not suppress those opinions they believe are false. Mill
responds that the person or government that is sure they are right are
ones who can satisfyingly respond to and freely invite constant
challenges to their beliefs. The second objection he deals with is the
claim that the role of a government is to encourage the continuation of
society, and so therefore, it has a duty to suppress ideas contrary to
this. This still assumes infallibility, Mill believes, and so is
invalid, as infallibility is impossible for humankind. To illustrate
this, Mill uses two examples: Jesus of Nazareth and Socrates. Both were
punished in the name of the safety of society, and both had truth to
contribute to society. Mill then preempts that if a belief is true, then
surely, taking into account what he has just said, it should be equally
well-poised persecution. He does not find this valid, and he again uses
argument by example. The Catholic Church put down the Reformation many
times before Martin Luther was successful, he writes, and society would
be better off if this had happened earlier, if persecution had not
occurred. Relatedly, Mill then preempts that being as in the civilized
world, people are no longer put to death for dissent, government
repression is more justified. He responds that intolerance of dissent
stifles intellectual growth, and that there can be no guarantee that
more repressive forms of suppression will not reemerge. And thus, Mill’s
absolute right to self-expression is valid.

If Mill is right about rights, if Mill is successful in believing that
self-expression is sacrosanct, then he must be wrong about utility as a
first principle. The contrapositive of this is if Mill is right about
utility, then he is wrong about self-expression being sacrosanct. Mill
defends the notion in Chapter 2 that there exists no instance where the
suppression of a belief leads to a better state of affairs, but this is
patently absurd. More precisely, he believes that no human being is
qualified enough to ascertain whether the suppression of a belief will
lead to a better state of affairs with relation to utility. This is
equally absurd. I will provide examples of both. Additionally, granting
either liberty or utility supremacy in times of conflict leads to
unacceptable conclusions. This, in conjunction with the fact that first
principles are assumed to admit of no proof, means that the concerned
moralist should pick one or the other, but there are compelling reasons
to pick utility over liberty.

In his defense of the absolute right to freedom of expression, Mill
believes that for all circumstances, suppression of expression does not
lead to greater happiness. However, this is untrue because there exists
at least one instance where it is false. While it would be easy to
imagine an instance, it is not necessary. In 2005, the whistle-blower
organization WikiLeaks released the largest set of leaked classified
information ever, known as the Afghan War Logs and Iraqi War Logs. While
the consequences to the general happiness are not easily quantifiable,
it is true that this leak led to the arrest and torture of the man
responsible, as well as endangering the lives of American soldiers and
Afghani and Iraqi citizens. The Taliban, an Islamic fundamentalist
group, claims to have used the papers to hunt down and kill the spies
and informers described in the leak. Free-press and free-expression
activists were quick to defend the right of WikiLeaks to release the
papers, and conservative and nationalistic Americans were quick to hound
the organization for endangering the lives of soldiers and allies alike.
In fact, WikiLeaks itself recognized the danger that some of the
documents held, and self-censored them by removing them from their
posts. The ultimatum here is clear - in forming one’s opinion about the
moral necessity, permissibility, or reprehensibility of the release of
these documents, the conflict is between the consequentialist
consideration for utility and the non-consequentialist consideration of
absolute rights. There is no clear way of reconciling these two ends in
either of Mill’s works covered here.

Despite this, even if it could be shown that the release of the
documents in this instance eventually led to a greater happiness, the
objection would still remain. In fact, even if all instances of
self-expression were shown to never lead to greater unhappiness, this
objection would still remain. This is because of the way that Mill
endorses rights - he calls the right to self-expression “absolute.”
Which means that Mill believes that they exist as “first principles”,
that they are not dependent on anything. This is a problem because
*Utilitarianism*’s premise is that there is one and it is the Greatest
Happiness Principle. Furthermore, Mill in *On Liberty* will often favor
liberty and expression over utility, for example:

> If all mankind minus one, were of one opinion, and only one person
> were of contrary opinion, mankind would be no more justified in
> silencing that one person, than he, if he had the power, would be
> justified in silencing mankind.

If self-expression is secondary to utility, then there exists cases
where people ought be suppressed. If self-expression is independent of
utility, the utility is not a first principle, or at least not the only.

For the second claim, it is absurd to claim that to suppress an opinion
is equivalent to assuming infallibility. In his three principle
examples, the Athenian Senate who put Socrates to death, the Catholic
Church who repressed all of Western civilizations for hundreds of years,
and the Roman authorities who put Jesus of Nazareth to death, it well
may be the case that some or all of them believed in their own
infallibility. This is not true of all cases, nor does it need to be. It
is fully reasonable to predict that there are people with enough
epistemological certainty about the consequences of an idea that they
could morally order the paper to be suppressed. When a person does act
like this, it does not mean that they are assuming infallibility.

Imagine the President of the United States has been informed that a
group of scientists are about to release their paper on the production
of smallpox. It outlines a process which makes its synthesis very easy.
This is not a wartime scenario, or one akin to Mill’s “corn-sellers are
starvers of the poor”, or one which is ridiculously impossible. The
expression of how to synthesize smallpox easily is not in and of itself
dangerous, no one is harmed by its expression. Furthermore, it is
research that if publicly released, could plausibly do some good, in
finding different cures, advancing medicine, etc. The research could
trigger the Isaac Newtown of virology to advance medicine. Most
significantly, it is not inciting, hateful, or inherently harmful to
publish scientific literature on the creation of a deadly and virulent
substance. The scientists are not saying or writing that tyrants be
assassinated. And their research is actually empirically true, no one
need worry about the truth or falsity of their claims. So it is not
obvious that this type of expression falls under the Harm Principle.
This falls under Mill’s second preemptive response to objections in
Chapter 2. What does Millian utility and liberty advise in a scenario
like this? Does the risk of pain completely outweigh the absolutism of
self-expression? Would the President be assuming infallibility in
censoring the publication of this paper?

The President is in a position to be informed of the relevant facts with
high degrees of certainty, with scientific and military advisors to seek
counsel from. However, it is still impossible to be 100% certain that
anyone would use the research to harm others. Similarly, it is still
impossible to discount that significant good could come from the
publication. Intuitively, one feels as though the President should
censor the paper. Yet intellectually, if Mill is right about liberty,
then the paper should not be censored. Despite all of this, if the
President values the general happiness, it is very likely the paper
should be censored. The President would not necessarily be assuming
infallibility by suppressing the release of the research, nor would he
need to in order to censor it. The risks associated with having an easy
method to produce smallpox are too great to justify its publication. And
risk here refers to potential benefit to society versus potential
detriment to society, and an elected government can make an informed
risk/benefit analysis without assuming infallibility. Furthermore, to
require infallibility to censor this document is absurd because it is a
totally unreasonably standard to hold censorship to. Mill does not need
infallibility to apply the Harm Principle, and it is unusual for Mill to
set a standard like this, as Mill is usually concerned with practical,
human matters. This is an instance where utility proves to be much more
intuitive and acceptable than liberty, and where absolute liberty would
be closer to anarchy than acceptable.

It is sufficient but not necessary to accept either of these rebuttals,
however, to see how Mill’s theories of liberty and utility are
inconsistent. Even if it is true that in every instance of allowing
self-expression or imposing censorship, that allowing self-expression
would lead to greater happiness for the greater number eventually, it
still would not matter, the theories of utility and liberty would still
not meld. The thesis of *Utilitarianism* is that the *summum bonnum* is
a first principle which does not admit of proof. If it was true that
self-expression always leads to more utility, then allowing absolute
self-expression would be a matter acting according to the first
principle of utility and not the absolute right to self-expression. On
the other hand, if the absolute right to self-expression is a first
principle, then there are instances when consequences and, by extension,
utility are not of any moral significance. When Mill called the right to
self-expression “absolute”, it is reasonable to assume that he did not
suddenly forget about utility. So what does he mean by this?

Being as Mill’s argument for the absolute right of self-expression is a
utilitarian one, it must be the case that if his argument is flawed, we
are to look to utility to reconcile the problems. The absolute liberty
of self-expression must be a secondary principle which stems from the
first principle of utility. If it were the other way around or if they
were equally morally valuable, there would be a slew of inconstancies.
Making The Liberty, Harm, and Autonomy principles secondary to happiness
fixes many of the problems with. In fact, utility is the standard Mill
believes should be used to resolve conflicts. Mill says of this in
*Utilitarianism*,

> ... The recognition of utility as a standard, not any particular way
> of applying it- the term supplies a want in the language, and offers,
> in many cases, a convenient mode of avoiding tiresome circumlocution.

The reason that this is even an issue at all for Mill is that there
seems to be something intrinsically valuable about individual liberty
for Mill. Despite this, his other writing seems to suggest that when
this conflict arises, one is to use utility as a standard to resolve the
conflict.

But even this interpretation of liberty as a secondary principle is
troubling. Imagine again the President of the United States, who is in
the position, as he is, to offer more Americans healthcare that is
better than the individuals in society can on their own. That through
the coercion of taxes, the President could increase the general
happiness by providing universal healthcare. Money is one’s means of
expressing oneself in 21st century America, but choosing what to buy.
The “second principle” interpretation does mean that a well-meaning and
rational tyrant would be as moral as the freely-elected democratic
leader with a society as the same level of happiness. But this is merely
a specific instance of the much more worrying general argument. If
liberty is secondary to utility, then when and if humankind develop
technologies sufficient enough to know with certainty what states of
affairs will make an individual or society happier, then they have the
moral obligation to coerce such a state of being on its constituents,
depriving them totally of liberty. While this is not ideal, it is better
than the alternative, as I shall now show.

So if this formulation, of having liberty secondary to utility, what can
be said of the opposite formulation? In the case where the President has
the power to grant more people better healthcare, the President ought
not. In the case where the benevolent technocrat has the power to offer
all of his subjects total happiness at the cost of liberty, however, the
subjects are granted their liberty. I think that Mill, presented with a
scenario like this one, would err on the side of utility. Because while
*On Liberty* claims that the rights of individuals are absolute, all of
the arguments for their absolute status are ones stemmed in utility.
This feels very wrong, because the overly sensitive concern for liberty
over utility will stray very close to anarchy. This is not acceptable
for Mill because his entire theory is one which is meant to foster human
faculties. In a society which values liberty over utility, each
citizen’s potential could be stifled in the name of keeping them “free.”

Mill argues in *Utilitarianism* that the sole moral consideration is the
Greatest Happiness Principle. Mill argues in *On Liberty* that the sole
justifiable intervention of personal liberty is harm to other under very
specific circumstances. His method for arguing for the Harm Principle is
a utilitarian one, but it is not clear that these two principles are
rigorously consistent. Being as Mill predominantly uses utility to
justify his other principles, even if he says the other principles are
absolute, we can assume he means secondary to utility. There is a
conflict between the two because absolute consideration for one or the
other leads to very different consequences.

Works Cited
===========

1.  Mill, John Stuart. *On Liberty*. 1859.
2.  Mill, John Stuart. *Utilitarianism*. 1863.

